HSCR3
STAND.
COM. REP. NO.
3
Honolulu, Hawaii
,
2025
RE:
H.B. No. 431
H.D.
1
Honorable Nadine K. Nakamura
Speaker, House of Representatives
Thirty-Third State Legislature
Regular Session of 2025
State of Hawaii
Madame:
Your Committee on Human
Services & Homelessness, to which was referred H.B. No. 431 entitled:
"A BILL FOR AN ACT RELATING TO HOUSING,"
begs leave to report as follows:
The purpose of this measure is to:
(1)
Appropriate
funds for the continued operation of the Kauhale Initiative;
(2)
Establish and appropriate funds into and out
of the Supportive Housing Special Fund to assist the Hawaii Housing Finance and
Development Corporation to facilitate the development of mixed-income rental
housing projects; and
(3)
Establish the Kauhale Initiative Special Fund
to assist the Statewide Office on Homelessness and Housing.
Your Committee
received testimony in support of this measure from the Governor's Coordinator
on Homelessness; Department of Human Services; Hawai
‘
i State Council on
Developmental Disabilities; Kaua
‘
i
County Housing Agency; Catholic Charities Hawai
‘
i; Hawaii
Substance Abuse Coalition; Democratic Party of Hawai
‘
i; Reimagining
Public Safety in Hawai
‘
i
Coalition; Hawai
‘
i
Health & Harm Reduction Center; Going Home Hawai
‘
i; and three
individuals.
Your Committee received
comments on this measure from the Department of Budget and Finance.
Your Committee finds that Hawaii has the
highest homelessness rate per capita in the nation.
The State has made significant strides in
addressing the pressing issue of homelessness, but continued efforts are
needed.
This measure represents a
critical step forward in meeting the housing needs of Hawaii's most vulnerable
populations by providing additional funds for the Kauhale Initiative and enabling
the Hawaii Housing Finance and Development Corporation to work with developers
to create additional supportive housing units.
This measure further supports efforts to build partnerships between
government and the community, which will help create an effective, efficient,
and transparent system for developers, service providers, individuals with
special housing needs, and the community as a whole.
Your Committee notes that to ensure
transparency and fairness within the community, the procurement of services and
projects related to the Kauhale Initiative should be awarded, to the extent
possible, to multiple bidders and not just a single entity.
Your Committee has amended this measure by:
(1)
Changing the appropriations to unspecified
amounts;
(2)
Deleting language that attempted to prevent
the proper lapse of a general fund appropriation at the end of the fiscal
biennium for which the appropriation was made;
(3)
Deleting language that would have established the
Kauhale Initiative Special Fund;
(4)
Inserting language that appropriates an
unspecified amount to assist the Statewide Office on Homelessness and Housing
Solutions in implementing the Kauhale Initiative;
(5)
Changing the effective dates to June 29, 3000,
and July 1, 3000, respectively, to encourage further discussion; and
(6)
Making technical, nonsubstantive amendments
for the purposes of clarity, consistency, and style.
Your Committee respectfully requests your Committee on Finance,
should it deliberate on this measure, to consider an appropriation amount of
$50,000,000 for the continued operation of the Kauhale Initiative and
$12,000,000 to be deposited into and out of the Supportive Housing Special
Fund, including $11,810,250 for the financing of the development, operation,
and maintenance of affordable, supportive housing projects and the provision of
supportive services for households with special needs who reside in the
supportive housing projects and $189,750 for
the establishment and hiring of one temporary
full-time equivalent (1.0 FTE) Housing Finance Specialist I within the Hawaii
Housing Finance and Development Corporation to help with administration of the
special fund.
As affirmed by the
record of votes of the members of your Committee on Human Services &
Homelessness that is attached to this report, your Committee is in accord with
the intent and purpose of H.B. No. 431, as amended herein, and recommends that
it pass Second Reading in the form attached hereto as H.B. No. 431, H.D. 1, and
be referred to your Committee on Housing.
Respectfully
submitted on behalf of the members of the Committee on Human Services &
Homelessness,
____________________________
LISA MARTEN, Chair