SSCR1528
STAND. COM. REP. NO.
1528
Honolulu,
Hawaii
RE:
H.B. No. 431
H.D. 2
S.D. 2
Honorable Ronald D. Kouchi
President of the Senate
Thirty-Third State Legislature
Regular Session of 2025
State of Hawaii
Sir:
Your Committee on
Ways and Means, to which was referred H.B. No. 431, H.D. 2,
S.D. 1, entitled:
"A BILL FOR AN ACT RELATING TO HOUSING,"
begs leave to report as follows:
The
purpose and intent of this measure is to appropriate moneys for housing
programs.
More
specifically, the measure appropriates moneys to:
(1)
The Office of the Governor for the continued
implementation of the Kauhale Initiative and Ohana Zones Pilot Program; and
(2)
The Hawaii Housing Finance and Development
Corporation for the development of supportive housing projects and the provision
of supportive services for certain households in the supportive housing
projects.
Your Committee
received written comments in support of this measure from the Office of the
Governor, Department of Human Services, Hawaii Housing Finance and Development
Corporation, State Council on Developmental Disabilities, Statewide Office on
Homelessness and Housing Solutions, County of Hawaii Office of Housing and
Community Development, Ava Sofia Foundation DBA Autism Moms of Kona, Catholic
Charities Hawaii, Easterseals Hawaii, Full Life, Hawaii Community Foundation,
Hawaii Substance Abuse Coalition, Kokua Kona, Maui Chamber of Commerce, Pacific
Housing Assistance Corporation, and six individuals.
Your Committee
finds that Hawaii has the highest homelessness rate per capita in the United
States.
Your Committee also finds that there
is a need for affordable housing that includes access to services for special
needs populations.
Your Committee
recognizes that the Kauhale Initiative and Ohana Zones Pilot Program have successfully
helped address homelessness in the State, and that the appropriations in this
measure will continue to support these critical programs.
Your Committee further recognizes that the
appropriation to the Hawaii Housing Finance and Development Corporation in this
measure will enable the development of supportive housing units for households
with special needs.
Your Committee has
amended this measure by:
(1)
Removing the preambles contained in sections 1
and 4 of the measure;
(2)
Requiring kauhale to be connected to public
utilities;
(3)
Authorizing monthly rents of no more than
thirty per cent of the area median income level to be charged for kauhale;
(4)
Changing the appropriation expending agency for
the Kauhale Initiative and Ohana Zones Pilot Program from the Office of the
Governor to the Department of Human Services; and
(5)
Making technical, nonsubstantive changes for
purposes of clarity, consistency and style.
As affirmed by the
record of votes of the members of your Committee on Ways and Means that is
attached to this report, your Committee is in accord with the intent and
purpose of H.B. No. 431, H.D. 2, S.D. 1, as amended herein, and
recommends that it pass Third Reading in the form attached hereto as H.B.
No. 431, H.D. 2, S.D. 2.
Respectfully submitted on behalf
of the members of the Committee on Ways and Means,
________________________________
DONOVAN
  M. DELA CRUZ, Chair