STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND FINANCE 
Ka ʻOihana Mālama Mo‘ohelu a Kālā 
P.O. BOX 150 
HONOLULU, HAWAI‘I  96810-0150 
 
 
 
JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
LUIS P. SALAVERIA 
GOVERNOR 
DIRECTOR 
 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
 
SABRINA NASIR 
LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR 
DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADMINISTRATIVE AND RESEARCH OFFICE 
EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM 
 
BUDGET, PROGRAM PLANNING AND MANAGEMENT DIVISION 
HAWAI‘I EMPLOYER-UNION HEALTH BENEFITS TRUST FUND 
 
FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION DIVISION 
OFFICE OF THE PUBLIC DEFENDER 
 
OFFICE OF FEDERAL AWARDS MANAGEMENT 
 
 
 
 
No. 1 Capitol District Building, 250 S. Hotel Street, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813 
 
WRITTEN ONLY 
TESTIMONY BY LUIS P. SALAVERIA 
DIRECTOR, DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND FINANCE 
TO THE SENATE COMMITTEES ON HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 
 AND HOUSING 
ON 
HOUSE BILL NO. 431, H.D. 2 
 
March 12, 2025 
1:05 p.m. 
Room 225 and Videoconference 
 
 
RELATING TO HOUSING 
 
The Department of Budget and Finance (B&F) offers comments on this bill. 
 
House Bill (H.B.) No. 431, H.D. 2, appropriates an unspecified amount of general 
funds in both FY 26 and FY 27 to the Office of the Governor for the continued operation 
of the Kauhale Initiative and provides that the appropriations may be transferred to 
designated departments or agencies for expenditure; establishes the Supportive 
Housing Special Fund (SHSF) to be administered by the Hawai‘i Housing Finance and 
Development Corporation (HHFDC) to facilitate the development, operation, and 
maintenance of mixed-income rental housing projects with supportive housing 
provisions for individuals and families with special needs; and appropriates an 
unspecified amount of general funds in both FY 26 and FY 27 for deposit into the SHSF 
and appropriates an unspecified amount of special fund ceiling for the SHSF in both 
FY 26 and FY 27 for HHFDC. 
 
As a matter of general policy, B&F does not support the creation of any special 
fund, which does not meet the requirements of Section 37-52.3, HRS.  Special funds 
,,,-,/g6’/-,,,___\
qQlnnI0nbOn“.‘
8*‘
_
_.n_w
O = -..
v<___..........,{v4 _
‘V
%
'  \‘/
,|'
gm)
..-.-..
‘IN’,
—-1",,‘/4/'
=_ 4:
’
= @ rxcn-am-‘>“‘
.,
,»
—-0,.”-I
4"
_
_.-‘ E‘ \ 9M5 9 "-.,_h»
:_,\,L ~
,.
\
'~.
‘
;@"‘~.@A-'
‘)1: '_-"
\*A'“"{lqA— 1>~\
1% '
_
_
.
. ,'

 
-2- 
 
 
 
should:  1) serve a need as demonstrated by the purpose, scope of work, and an 
explanation why the program cannot be implemented successfully under the general 
fund appropriation process; 2) reflect a clear nexus between the benefits sought and 
charges made upon the users or beneficiaries or a clear link between the program and 
the sources of revenue; 3) provide an appropriate means of financing for the program or 
activity; and 4) demonstrate the capacity to be financially self-sustaining.  Regarding 
H.B. No. 431, H.D. 2, it is difficult to determine whether the proposed SHSF would be 
self-sustaining. 
 
Thank you for your consideration of our comments. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
LT. GOVERNOR 
 
 
 
 
 
DEAN MINAKAMI 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAII 
DEPARTMENT OF BUSINESS, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND TOURISM  
HAWAII HOUSING FINANCE AND DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 
677 QUEEN STREET, SUITE 300 
HONOLULU, HAWAII 96813 
FAX: (808) 587-0600 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Statement of 
DEAN MINAKAMI 
Hawaii Housing Finance and Development Corporation 
Before the 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 
AND 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON HOUSING 
March 12, 2025 at 1:05 p.m. 
State Capitol, Room 225 
In consideration of 
H.B. 431 HD2 
RELATING TO HOUSING. 
Chairs San Buenaventura and Chang, Vice Chair Aquino and Hashimoto, and members 
of the Committees.   
HHFDC supports HB 431 HD2, which appropriates funds for the Kauhale Initiative. It 
also establishes and appropriates funds into and out of the Supportive Housing Special 
Fund administered by the Hawaii Housing Finance and Development Corporation 
(HHFDC). HHFDC supports the measure so long as it does not adversely impact 
priorities identified in the Executive Budget Request for FY 2026. 
HHFDC agrees that supportive housing is an innovative solution to house special needs 
populations, including the chronically homeless, individuals with disabilities, individuals 
transitioning from incarceration, youth aging out of foster care, domestic violence 
survivors, veterans, those suffering from substance abuse, and the frail elderly.  
HHFDC recognizes the need for a dedicated funding source to assist individuals with 
special needs. In addition to funds needed to construct units, supportive housing 
typically requires a stable funding source to provide rental assistance to individuals and 
to pay for supportive services.  The Supportive Housing Special Fund is a new financing 
tool that will help HHFDC to facilitate the development of supportive housing units in 
standalone projects or integrated in mixed-income rental housing projects. 
1 ,4
r,
<,
4
‘-r"_7’
_ A“
*0 '~.
:1-C.nh '
/G
=1»:--.,
~
W I.
_,...,____
Q *5-:§7“'*‘-"-:1
.
-._»\__a
,__
Ag;_ .._
-._,_..,
T!’-*=
a%-
1? ‘
~
1.
.'P
...-P
_ ' V
5 '¢:"'.".I'"<'1'v'¢F‘.%
<<¢,_
my H
¢
\ 9 5 9 "‘--5"’,
. -‘QM /,1//' ‘K’,
1
1
,|
1
‘

 
 
 
 
HHFDC requests $175,000 for one full-time equivalent (1.0 FTE) housing finance 
specialist I position needed to help administer the supportive housing special fund.  
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this bill. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
                                                       KA MOKU‘ĀINA O HAWAI‘I 
                                 STATE COUNCIL ON DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES 
                                'A'UNIKE MOKU'ĀPUNI NO KA NĀ KĀWAI KULA 
PRINCESS VICTORIA KAMĀMALU BUILDING 
1010 RICHARDS STREET, Room 122 
HONOLULU, HAWAI῾I  96813 
TELEPHONE: (808) 586-8100    FAX: (808) 586-7543 
March 12, 2025 
 
The Honorable Senator Joy A. San Buenaventura, Chair 
Senate Committee on Health and Human Services  
The Honorable Senator Stanley Chang, Chair 
Senate Committee on Housing 
 The Thirty-Third Legislature  
State Capitol 
State of Hawai῾i 
Honolulu, Hawai῾i 96813 
 
Dear Senator San Buenaventura, Senator Chang, and Committee Members: 
 
SUBJECT: HB431 HD2 Relating to Housing 
The Hawaii State Council on Developmental Disabilities STRONGLY SUPPORTS 
HB431 HD2, which appropriates funds for the continued operation of the Kauhale Initiative and 
authorizes those funds to be used for the Ohana Zones Pilot Program. Establishes and 
appropriates funds into and out of the Supportive Housing Special Fund. Effective 6/29/3000. 
(HD2)   
This bill represents a critical step forward in meeting the housing needs of Hawai‘i’s 
most vulnerable populations, including individuals with intellectual and developmental 
disabilities (I/DD). Hawai‘i’s I/DD population often faces significant barriers to accessing safe, 
stable, and affordable housing. Individuals with I/DD are more likely to experience 
unemployment, limited income, and social isolation, making it exceedingly difficult to secure 
independent housing. HB431 HD2 provides a pathway to addressing these systemic 
challenges by ensuring that housing is affordable and integrated with services necessary for 
residents to thrive. 
Supportive services funded under this bill, such as case management, life skills training, 
and assistance with daily living activities, are vital for individuals with I/DD to live independently 
and participate fully in their communities. The promotion of mixed-income rental housing 
developments, as outlined in HB431 HD2, fosters inclusive environments where individuals 
with I/DD can live alongside diverse populations. This approach reduces stigma and 
encourages greater community understanding and acceptance of individuals with disabilities. 
M
/'\
s~:."$i."-
\\
OP
4‘
#4“
‘P .\Q5D_'
T
~
.>'¥‘fi‘l‘3"5‘:§§'“/
.
‘
1.‘ '
.
"
qr: Q;
°
_\.+'
"'4-o-nu-I‘;

HB431 HD2 Relating to Housing  
March 12, 2025 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
 
By addressing housing insecurity and ensuring access to integrated support services, 
HB431 HD2 will enable individuals with I/DD to live more independently and with dignity, 
reduce reliance on costly institutional care or emergency services, and improve overall health, 
social inclusion, and quality of life for individuals with I/DD.  
The DD Council believes that the passage of HB431 HD2 will have transformative 
impacts on Hawai‘i’s I/DD community, providing them with the stability and support they need 
to lead fulfilling and independent lives. We urge you to pass this bill to ensure that the needs of 
individuals with I/DD and other vulnerable populations are prioritized in Hawai‘i’s housing 
solutions. Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in strong support of HB431 
HD2.   
Sincerely, 
 
Daintry Bartoldus 
Executive Administrator 
mmhm

 
 
AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY AGENCY 
 
JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR  
KE KIAʻĀINA  
  
  
 
 
  
STATE OF HAWAII  
KA MOKUʻĀINA O HAWAIʻI  
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES  
KA ʻOIHANA MĀLAMA LAWELAWE KANAKA  
Office of the Director  
P. O. Box 339  
Honolulu, Hawaii 96809-0339  
 
March 11, 2025 
  
RYAN I. YAMANE 
DIRECTOR  
KA LUNA HOʻOKELE 
  
  
JOSEPH CAMPOS II  
DEPUTY DIRECTOR  
KA HOPE LUNA HOʻOKELE  
   
  
 TRISTA SPEER  
DEPUTY DIRECTOR  
KA HOPE LUNA HOʻOKELE  
 
  
  
  
TO: 
The Honorable Senator San Buenaventura, Chair  
Senate Committee on Health and Human Services 
 
The Honorable Senator Stanley Chang, Chair 
 
 
Senate Committee on Housing 
 
FROM:  
Ryan I. Yamane, Director 
 
SUBJECT: 
HB 431 HD2 – RELATING TO HOUSING. 
 
 
 
Hearing: 
March 12, 2025, 1:05 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
Conference Room 225 & Videoconference, State Capitol 
 
DEPARTMENT’S POSITION:  The Department of Human Services (DHS) supports the 
intent of this measure that invests in the Kauhale initiative and permanent supportive housing 
as strategies to reduce homelessness.  DHS requests an amendment and provides comments.  
DHS defers to the Hawaii Housing Finance and Development Corporation (HHFDC) and the 
Department of Budget & Finance on special funds and prefers that any appropriation align with 
and not reduce or replace budget priorities identified in the executive budget. 
DHS respectfully requests reconsideration of the amendment requiring at least two bids 
for Kauhale projects over $1 million.  The administration has reconsidered this requested 
amendment, see page 6, lines 15-18, and clarifies that when an emergency proclamation is in 
effect related to homelessness and includes Kauhale or Ohana Zones pilot program projects, 
the developing agency may still consider more than one bid for any project.  For single bids, the 
price reasonable analysis is applied.  When there is no emergency proclamation in effect, these 

March 11, 2025 
Page 2 
 
 
AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY AGENCY 
 
projects should follow the State Procurement Code or exemption provided by statute or session 
law.  DHS is also concerned that the two-bid minimum may delay project development in 
certain communities if only one bid is received.  For these reasons, DHS respectfully requests 
that the provision regarding at least two bidders for a Kauhale project estimated cost of over $1 
million be deleted (page 6, lines 15-18).  
PURPOSE:  The bill appropriates funds for the continued operation of the Kauhale 
Initiative and authorizes those funds to be used for the Ohana Zones Pilot Program.  Establishes 
and appropriates funds into and out of the Supportive Housing Special Fund. Effective 
6/29/3000. (HD2) 
The House Committee on Human Services & Homelessness amended the measure by: 
(1) Changing the appropriations to unspecified amounts; 
(2) Deleting language that attempted to prevent the proper lapse of a general fund 
appropriation at the end of the fiscal biennium for which the appropriation was 
made; 
(3) Deleting language that would have established the Kauhale Initiative Special 
Fund; 
(4) Inserting language that appropriates an unspecified amount to assist the 
Statewide Office on Homelessness and Housing Solutions in implementing the 
Kauhale Initiative; 
(5) Changing the effective dates to June 29, 3000, and July 1, 3000, respectively, to 
encourage further discussion; and 
(6) Making technical, nonsubstantive amendments for the purposes of clarity, 
consistency, and style. 
The Committee on Housing further amended the measure by: 
(1) Expanding the authorized uses of funds appropriated for the Kauhale Initiative; 
(2) Authorizing funds appropriated for the Kauhale Initiative to be used for the 
Ohana Zones Pilot Program established under Act 209, Session Laws of Hawaii 
2018; 
(3) Requiring at least two bidders for any Kauhale project estimated to be over 
$1,000,000 if appropriated funds are used to contract for the procurement of 
building services and projects related to the Kauhale Initiative; 
(4) Deleting the unspecified appropriation to the Statewide Office on Homelessness 
and Housing Solutions to implement the Kauhale Initiative; and 
(5) Making technical, nonsubstantive amendments for the purposes of clarity, 
consistency, and style. 
 

March 11, 2025 
Page 3 
 
 
AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY AGENCY 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments on this measure. 

E X E C U T I V E  C H A M B E R S  
K E  K E ʻ E N A  O  K E  K I A ʻ Ā I N A  
 JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           JUN YANG 
 
GOVERNOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         GOVERNOR’S HOMELESS COORDINATOR 
 
KE KIAʻĀINA 
 
 
 
 
 
   STATEWIDE OFFICE ON 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         HOMELESSNESS & HOUSING SOLUTIONS 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 
AND SENATE COMMITTEE ON HOUSING 
Wednesday, March 12, 2025 
1:05 Pm 
State Capitol, Conference Room 225, and Videoconference 
 
In Support 
House Bill No. 431 HD2, RELATING TO HOUSING 
 
 
Aloha Chair San Buenaventura, Chair Chang, Vice Chair Aquino, Vice Chair Hashimoto, and 
Members:  
 
The Statewide Office on Homelessness and Housing Solutions (SOHHS) supports H.B. 431HD2, 
Relating to Housing.  We respectfully ask for your favorable consideration of this bill. 
 
SOHHS supports the intent of this measure that invests in the Kauhale initiative and permanent 
supportive housing as strategies to reduce homelessness.  SOHHS requests an amendment and 
provides comments.  SOHHS defers to the Hawaii Housing Finance and Development 
Corporation (HHFDC) and the Department of Budget and Finance on special funds and prefers 
that any appropriation align with and not reduce or replace budget priorities identified in the 
executive budget. 
 
SOHHS respectfully requests reconsideration of the amendment requiring at least two bids for 
Kauhale projects over $1 million.  The office has reconsidered this requested amendment, see 
page 6, lines 15 – 18, and clarifies that when an emergency proclamation is in effect related to 
homelessness and includes Kauhale or Ohana Zones pilot program projects, the developing 
agency may still consider more than one bid for any project.  When there is no emergency 
proclamation in effect, these projects should follow the State Procurement Code or exemption 
provided by statute or session law.  SOHHS is also concerned that the two-bid minimum may 
delay project development in certain communities if only one bid is received. 
 
For these reasons, SOHHS respectfully requests that the provision regarding at least two 
bidders for a Kauhale project estimated cost of over $1 million be deleted (page 6, lines 15 – 
18). 
 
 
 	

Jun Yang Testimony on HB431 HD2 
Senate Committees on Health and Human Services and Housing 
March 12, 2025 
Page 2 
 
As the Governor’s Coordinator on Homelessness, I am honored to further the important work 
of this office and the administration for the state. In 2024, the Green Administration set out 
with an ambitious goal of housing and sheltering half of our unsheltered homeless population 
by the end of 2026. I am confident that with this request, SOHHS will further expand deeply 
affordable housing inventory and supportive services for individuals experiencing homelessness 
through the state’s Kauhale Initiative.  
 
Currently, we have 18 Kauhale active across the state and have a goal to establish 30 kauhale 
villages by the end of 2026. This was all made possible by the generous support of the Hawaiʻi 
State Legislature which appropriated $33 million for FY25 for kauhale initiatives.  
More than just temporary shelter, Kauhale is a unique and innovative approach that strives to 
demonstrate a new, cost-effective model that centers housing as a critical component of 
healthcare. Our Kauhale communities’ pair personal spaces with shared living spaces, often 
envisioned as tiny homes communities or repurposed commercial, hotel, or apartment 
buildings, that respond to the unique needs of subpopulations experiencing homelessness. The 
model is built on the foundation of fostering community and responsibility among residents. 
Residents of Kauhale are provided access to robust wrap around services, including case 
management and medical care to build healthy and resilient communities that help people stay 
successfully housed long-term. This is what makes Hawaii and our kauhale initiatives different 
and unique. 
 
SOHHS appreciates your consideration of our request to further our efforts to reduce and 
prevent homelessness across the state. Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in 
strong support on this measure. 
 

 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF HB431 HD2 
RELATING TO HOUSING 
Senate Committee on Health and Human Services 
Senate Committee on Housing  
 
                                                       
March  12th,2025 
1:05 p.m.   
Conference room 225 
Aloha Chair San Buenaventura and Chang, Vice Chair Aquino and Hashimoto, members 
of the  Committee on Housing:  
The Office of Hawaiian Affairs (OHA) SUPPORTS HB431 HD2, which supports the 
Kauhale initiative in reducing homelessness, creating affordable housing, and fostering 
community. We recognize that physical solutions by themselves will not solve social and 
economic problems, but neither can economic vitality, community stability, and mental & 
physical health be sustained without supportive physical framework of having stable 
housing options. 
This bill is crucial as it marks a significant step towards addressing the housing 
crisis across the state of Hawai’i. We acknowledge housing is the highest cost item for 
Hawai’i families. Housing affordability has become increasingly challenging, particularly 
for Native Hawaiian families who seek to reside in Hawai’i. The growing affordable 
housing problem is one of the most critical issues faced by our communities, especially 
our Native Hawaiian communities. Many kama‘aina families struggle to find adequate 
housing and to make ends meet. A significant portion of the homeless population 
identifies as Native Hawaiian1.  
 
The Supportive Housing Special Fund would support the efforts of stable housing 
and supportive services to vulnerable populations of Hawai’i. This finance mechanism 
will assist Hawai`i Housing Finance and Development Corporation (HHFDC) to facilitate, 
coordinate, and maintain Kauhale facilities and services. This will address ‘Ohana zones 
Pilot Program established under Act 209 that work towards providing a mix use of options 
for unsheltered individuals, and others with special housing needs: including persons with 
 
1 Homeless point-in-time count. (n.d.). 
https://www.btghawaii.org/media/uploads/2024_btg_pit_count_report_final.pdf  
 
 
QFFICE OF HAWAIIAN AFFAIRS

 
addictions, youth aging out of foster care, domestic violence survivors, kupuna, people 
with mental illness, chronic health conditions, histories of trauma and other barriers. 
Stable housing and adequate resources of treatment allow for the person to move towards 
permanent housing, inclusion of community, and better health overall. The center for 
budget and policy priorities found that people offered supportive housing spent 23 % 
fewer days in hospitals, had 33 % fewer emergency room visits, and spent 42 % fewer 
days in nursing homes over a year. Furthermore, supportive housing reduces recidivism. A 
study by Hawaii based organization Partners in Care revealed that the recidivism rate for 
individuals who received housing support was 12.8% versus 50% without housing 
support. This indicates that stable housing and intervention services offered through 
initiatives such as Kauhale have great impact on justice involved individuals.   
 
  
This initiative is in line with OHA’s mission to improve the conditions of Native 
Hawaiians and ensure their equitable access to quality housing, education, healthcare, 
and economic opportunities. It reflects our commitment to advancing the well-being of 
our beneficiaries and the broader community. Addressing homelessness and affordable 
housing issues is a multi-prong approach.  
 
OHA supports HB431 HD2, which aims to meet the urgent need for affordable housing 
and address homelessness. Mahalo for your attention and commitment to enhancing the 
well-being of our community we ask that the Committee PASS this measure. 

JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR 
KE KIAʻĀINA 
 
 
 
 
BONNIE KAHAKUI 
ADMINISTRATOR 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAIʻI | KA MOKUʻĀINA O HAWAIʻI 
 
STATE PROCUREMENT OFFICE 
P.O. Box 119 
Honolulu, Hawaii  96810-0119 
Tel: (808) 586-0554 
email: state.procurement.office@hawaii.gov  
http://spo.hawaii.gov 
 
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY 
OF 
BONNIE KAHAKUI, ADMINISTRATOR 
STATE PROCUREMENT OFFICE 
 
TO THE SENATE COMMITTEES 
ON 
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 
AND 
HOUSING 
MARCH 12, 2025, 1:05 PM 
 
HOUSE BILL 431, HD2 
RELATING TO HOUSING 
Chairs San Buenaventura and Chang, Vice Chairs Aquino and Hashimoto, and members of the 
committee, thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony on House Bill 431, HD2.  The 
State Procurement Office (SPO) appreciates the intent of this bill and recommends that the 
procurement exemption language noted below be removed. 
Section 4, Page 10, lines 2 to 6: 
§201H- Supportive housing special fund. (f) “…supportive housing and services.  The 
corporation shall be exempt from comply with chapter 103D in selecting a qualified 
private or nonprofit organization to assist with the development and maintenance of 
supportive housing and provision of rental assistance and supportive services.  The 
corporation may….” 
Exemptions to the Hawaii Procurement Code have always been a concern of the SPO.  As 
stated in the National Association of State Procurement Officials (NASPO) white paper on 
“Ethics and Accountability,” “Maintaining the integrity of public procurement is one of the most 
important pillars of government.” 
Chapter 103D, HRS, is the State's single source of public procurement policy to be applied 
equally and uniformly, while providing fairness, open competition, a level playing field, 
government disclosure, and transparency in the procurement and contracting process vital to 
good government. Public procurement's primary objective is to provide everyone equal 
opportunity to compete for government contracts, to prevent favoritism, collusion, or fraud in 
awarding of contracts. To legislate that any one entity should be exempt from compliance with 

 
Testimony of the State Procurement Office 
House Bill 431, HD2 
 
 
 
 
Senate Committee on Health & Human Services 
Senate Committee on Housing 
March 12, 2025 
Page 2 
 
 
both Chapters 103D and 103F, HRS, conveys a sense of disproportionate equality in the law’s 
application.  
Exemptions to the Code mean that all procurements made with taxpayer monies will not have 
the same oversight, accountability and transparency requirements mandated by those 
procurements processes provided in the code.  It means that there is no requirement for due 
diligence, proper planning, or consideration of protections for the state in contract terms and 
conditions, nor are there any set requirements to conduct cost and price analysis and market 
research or post-award contract management. As such, Agencies can choose whether to 
compete any procurement or go directly to one contractor.  It also means Agencies are not 
required to adhere to the code's procurement integrity laws.  
The National Association of State Procurement Officials states that “Businesses suffer when 
there is inconsistency in procurement laws and regulations. Complex, arcane procurement rules 
of numerous jurisdictions discourage competition by raising the costs to businesses to 
understand and comply with these different rules. Higher costs are recovered through the prices 
offered by a smaller pool of competitors, resulting in unnecessarily inflated costs to state and 
local governments.”  
Thank you. 
 

 
 
 
Senate Committee on Housing  
 
Hearing: Wednesday, March 12th, 2025. 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF HB431: RELATING TO HOUSING. 
 
The Hawaii State Youth Commission (HiYC) was established to “advise the governor and 
legislature on the effects of legislative policies, needs, assessments, priorities, programs, and 
budgets concerning the youth of the state.” We are writing in support of HB431. 
 
The youth of today are faced with the issue of affordable housing. It has been known for a while 
that the state of Hawaiʻi has one of the highest costs of living in the country. As this problem only 
grows in size, so does our worry for the fates of our youths in the state, as we are the upcoming 
generation that will be entering the workforce and will soon be looking for homes of our own.     
 
This is why it is concerning to us, as youth, that our state does not have enough legislation and 
social programs in place to help the people who are already, or at risk of being, houseless in the 
state. Social programs like the Kauhale Initiative are meant to act as a safety net for our people 
in times of great need, acting as a community that gathers together to build better foundations.  
 
We believe that the housing crisis is a generational matter. Therefore, if nothing is done about 
this quickly, it will disproportionately impact the upcoming generation of youths, who will need all 
the support we can get. It is the government's responsibility to protect and serve the people of 
Hawaiʻi, especially our youth. For this reason, we urge the Committee to pass this bill, and we 
believe that this can be a great benefit to the at-risk youth of the state.     
 
Thank you for your consideration of our testimony in support of this important bill, 
 
The Hawaiʻi State Youth Commission. 
 
hawaiistateyc@gmail.com 
 
 



OFFICE OF HOUSING
KE KE‘ENA HO‘OLALA KUKULA HALE
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU
530 SOUTH KlNG STREET, ROOM 306 - HONOLULU, HAWAl‘l 96813
PHONE: (808)768-4675 - FAX: (808) 768-4242 - WEBSlTE: www.honolulu.gov/housing
ri--,_
Q‘O
.‘-60¢‘
.
0°
a 0
R|cKs|£\/:r£1)<'?;{iARo|
,-
KEVIN AUGER
_
,
EXECUTIVEDIRECTOR
°
1
ﬂ‘\
ME“
I
I
1=-~_~f
1
1
PO 0 HO OKO
r
1-,
1'
\
,1!
1
. , .. qr, ,. , .
".
,
1
.1-'
'
..
»,
,, _¢
-
._
_.
'~ Ior u> »
March 10 2025
2°25‘H°U‘°36
The Honorable Joy A. San Buenaventura, Chair
The Honorable Stanley Chang, Chair
The Honorable Henry J.C. Aquino, Vice Chair
The Honorable Troy N. Hashimoto, Vice Chair
Members of the Senate Committee on Health and Human Services
and Members of the Senate Committee on Housing
Hawai‘i State Capitol
415 South Beretania Street
Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96813
Dear Chair San Buenaventura, Chair Chang, Vice Chair Aquino, Vice Chair Hashimoto,
and Committee Members:
SUBJECT: Testimony in Support of HB431, HD2 — Relating to Housing
Hearing: Wed., Mar. 12, 2025, 1:05 p.m. at the State Capitol, #225
The Office of Housing supports HB431, HD2, which would establish and
appropriate funding for a Supportive Housing Special Fund under the Hawai‘i Housing
Finance and Development Corporation (HHFDC) to support the development and
operations of supportive housing, and would also ensure the continuation of the kauhale
initiative. We recognize the necessity of facilitating housing across all incomes to
address the full spectrum of need for our residents. This bill would support community
members who are most at-risk of homelessness or may already be experiencing
homelessness, and would facilitate the creation of units that can be very challenging to
make financially feasible.
Supportive housing is a type of housing specifically for higher-needs persons that
combines housing units with rent subsidization and supportive sen/ices. This type of
housing serves households that may not otherwise be able to remain stably housed and
assists a wide variety of populations, including individuals transitioning from
incarceration, youth aging out of foster care, those experiencing homelessness,
community members challenged by mental illnesses, and persons with intellectual,
developmental, or physical disabilities. Supportive housing is a highly effective housing

The Honorable Joy A. San Buenaventura, Chair
The Honorable Stanley Chang, Chair
The Honorable Henry J.C. Aquino, Vice Chair
The Honorable Troy N. Hashimoto, Vice Chair
Members of the Senate Committee on Health and Human Services
and Members of the Senate Committee on Housing
Hawai‘i State Capitol
March 10, 2025
Page 2
intervention that helps not only those housed by these programs, but also lowers cost
burdens on our public systems, including our healthcare and incarceration systems.
We appreciate the introduction of this important measure that would increase
supportive housing options for the most vulnerable members of our community.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
Sincerely,
%--~
Kevin D.
uger
Executive Director
APPROVED:
Michael D. Formby, Managing Director
Office of the Managing Director

 
    C L A R E N C E  T .  C .  C H I N G  C A M P U S   1 8 2 2  K e ‘ e a u m o k u  S t r e e t ,  H o n o l u l u ,  H I  9 6 8 2 2  
    P h o n e  ( 8 0 8 ) 5 2 7 - 4 8 1 3    
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF HB 431 HD2: RELATING TO HOUSING 
 
TO:  
Senate Committees on Health and Human Services, and Housing 
FROM: 
Tina Andrade, President and CEO, Catholic Charities Hawai‘i 
Hearing: 
Wednesday, 3/12/25;  1:05 PM;  Room 225 & Videoconference 
 
Chair San Buenaventura, Chair Chang, and Members, Committees on Health and Human 
Services, and Housing: 
 
Catholic Charities Hawai`i strongly supports HB 431 HD2, which appropriates funds for the 
Kauhale Initiative, and funds into and out of the Supportive Housing Special Fund.   
 
Catholic Charities Hawai`i (CCH) is a tax exempt, community-based organization that has been 
providing social services in Hawai`i for over 77 years.  CCH has programs serving elders, 
veterans, children, families, homeless and immigrants.  Our mission is to provide services and 
advocacy to the most vulnerable of the people in Hawai`i.  We assist over 40,000 people 
annually across the state and have a long history of addressing affordable housing and 
homelessness. 
 
These initiatives are crucial to address Hawai`i’s homelessness crisis.  On Oahu, 62% of 
homeless persons are unsheltered.  The Kauhale Initiative accelerates the development of 
diverse housing options, helping people move off the streets into much-needed transitional and 
bridge housing.  However, deeply affordable permanent housing remains KEY to truly ending 
homelessness. 
 
The proposed Supportive Housing Special Fund is particularly vital. It provides a transparent 
structured financial mechanism to integrate development, operations, and supportive services—
ensuring that vulnerable populations receive not just shelter, but the assistance needed for long-
term stability. By centralizing funding and coordination under the Hawai'i Housing Finance and 
Development Corporation (HHFDC), this initiative streamlines coordination, benefiting 
developers, service providers, and, most importantly, individuals in need. 
 
We must prioritize chronically homeless individuals and those with special housing needs—
veterans, individuals with addictions, aging-out foster youth, domestic violence survivors, 
developmentally disabled persons, and frail elders.  Without supportive housing, many face 
institutionalization, costly emergency interventions, or even premature death.  This bill could 
save lives.  Recently, Catholic Charities Hawai‘i assisted a medically fragile kupuna living on 
the streets. She tragically passed away one week before we secured an emergency housing 
voucher. This should never happen again. 
 
Catholic Charities Hawai`i urges your support for this bill.   Both the Kauhale and the Supportive 
Housing Initiatives are essential to tackling homelessness.  Please approve significant funding to 
bring stability and hope to those who need ongoing supportive services to remain in our 
communities.  If you have any questions, please contact our Legislative Liaison, Betty Lou 
Larson, at (808) 527-4813.  
CATHOLIC CHARITIES I-IA\WAI‘I
I
United
.
Aloha United my

 
 
HAWAIʻI HEALTH & 
HARM REDUCTION CENTER 
677 Ala Moana Blvd, Ste 226 
Honolulu, HI 96813 
 (808) 521-2437 
www.hhhrc.org 
 
 
 
“Reducing harm, 
promoting health, 
creating wellness, and 
fighting stigma 
in Hawaiʻi and 
the Pacific.” 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF HB 431, HD 2 
 
 
TO: 
Chair San Buenaventura, Vice Chair Aquino, & HHS Committee 
Chair Chang, Vice Chair Hashimoto, & HOU Committee  
 
 
FROM: 
Nikos Leverenz, Policy & Advancement Manager 
 
 
DATE: 
March 12, 2025 (1:05 PM) 
 
 
 
 
 
Health & Harm Reduction Center (HHHRC) strongly supports HB 431, HD 2, 
Hawaiʿi which would provide funding for the Kauhale Initiative. 
 
The bill addresses homelessness in Hawaiʻi by funding the Kauhale Initiative and 
establishing a Supportive Housing Special Fund to develop, operate, and maintain 
affordable housing for individuals with special needs, such as those recovering 
from addiction, formerly incarcerated individuals, and domestic violence 
survivors.  
 
Safe and stable housing is critical to improving health outcomes, reducing 
reliance on emergency services, and enhancing overall community well-being. By 
investing in housing-first solutions with wraparound services, the bill fosters long-
term stability and resilience for Hawaiʻi’s most vulnerable populations. This 
legislation is a crucial step in reducing chronic homelessness while promoting 
public health, safety, and harm reduction.  
 
HHHRC’s mission is to reduce harm, promote health, create wellness, and fight 
stigma in Hawaiʻi and the Pacific. We work with many individuals impacted by 
poverty, housing instability, and other social determinants of health. Many have 
behavioral health problems, including those related to substance use and mental 
health conditions, and have also been deeply impacted by trauma related to 
histories of physical, sexual, and psychological abuse. 
 
Mahalo for the opportunity to provide testimony. 
 

 
 
HB431 HD2 Kauhale 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 
Senator Joy A. San Buenaventura, Chair 
Senator Henry J.C. Aquino, Vice Chair 
COMMITTEE ON HOUSING 
Senator Stanley Chang, Chair 
Senator Troy N. Hashimoto, Vice Chair 
  
Wednesday, Mar 12, 2025: 1:05: Room 225 Videoconference 
  
 
 
Hawaii Substance Abuse Coalition Supports HB431 HD2: 
 
ALOHA CHAIR, VICE CHAIR, AND DISTINGUISHED COMMITTEE MEMBERS. My 
name is Alan Johnson. I am the current chair of the Hawaii Substance Abuse Coalition 
(HSAC), a statewide organization for substance use disorder and co-occurring mental 
health disorder treatment and prevention agencies and recovery-oriented services. 
 
 
HSAC notes that formal treatment, such as residential and outpatient will be 
critically needed for Kauhale residents to 
achieve functionality and recovery.  
 
Studies show that once housed, 
feeling safe and stable, many 
homeless voluntarily seek substance 
abuse treatment because they want 
improved functionality.  
 
• For example, 50-60% of individuals in Housing First programs 
engaged in substance use disorders treatment when supportive 
services were offered. Programs offering integrated care (housing, food, 
medical care, and counseling) report higher engagement in substance abuse 
treatment, with rates often exceeding 50% in some cases. 
 
• After safe housing, homeless still are at elevated risk for 
experiencing substance use disorders (SUDs), mental disorders, 
trauma, medical conditions, employment challenges, and incarceration. Both 
treatment and housing needs must be concurrently addressed.1 
 
 
1 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2021). Behavioral Health Services for People Who 
Are Homeless. Advisory. chrome-
extension://efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj/https://library.samhsa.gov/sites/default/files/pep20-06-04-003.pdf 
Residential and Outpatient 
Substance Use Disorder funding 
has been reduced at a time when 
studies indicate that housed 
homeless will need these critical 
services.  

• Substance use, mental health, medical care, and social supports services are 
critical for mitigating risks of SUDs and mental disorders and improving 
health outcomes. 
 
• Programs using the “Housing First” model prioritize stable housing without 
requiring sobriety or participation in substance abuse treatment as a condition 
for housing. Once stabilized, motivational interviewing and harm-reduction 
strategies can encourage more people to pursue treatment. 
 
• Many homeless individuals with substance use disorders also struggle with 
mental health conditions. Addressing these conditions alongside addiction 
increases the likelihood of seeking and remaining in treatment. 
Residential and intensive outpatient treatment is vital for individuals who 
need intensive, round-the-clock care, particularly when addiction is 
severe or compounded by complex personal, social, or psychological 
challenges. It provides the stability and resources needed to build a strong 
foundation for lasting recovery. 
Providing stable housing and basic necessities significantly increases the likelihood 
that individuals will consider and engage in substance abuse treatment. Hawaii 
needs to be prepared for large numbers of Kauhale residents asking for 
treatment just at the time when capacity is insufficient to meet this need.  
 
We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony and are available for questions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
To advance and promote a healthy economic environment 
for business, advocating for a responsive government and 
quality education, while preserving Maui’s unique community 
characteristics. 
 
HEARING BEFORE THE SENATE COMMITTEES ON HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES and 
HOUSING 
HAWAII STATE CAPITOL, HOUSE CONFERENCE ROOM 225 
Wednesday, March 12, 2025 AT 1:05 P.M. 
  
To The Honorable Senator Joy A. San Buenaventura, Chair 
The Honorable Senator Henry J.C. Aquino, Vice Chair 
Members of the Committee on Health and Human Services 
To The Honorable Senator Stanley Chang, Chair 
The Honorable Senator Troy N. Hashimoto, Vice Chair 
Members of the committee on Housing 
 
SUPPORT HB431 HD2 RELATING TO HOUSING 
  
The Maui Chamber of Commerce SUPPORTS HB431 HD2 which appropriates funds for the continued 
operation of the Kauhale Initiative and authorizes those funds to be used for the Ohana Zones Pilot 
Program; and establishes and appropriates funds into and out of the Supportive Housing Special Fund. 
 
The Chamber recognizes that Hawaii has the highest homelessness rate per capita in the nation. The 
2024 Point In Time Count reported a total of 6,389 individuals experiencing homelessness in the State. 
The majority are on Oahu, with 4,494, followed by Hawaii (718), Maui (654), and Kauai (523). 
 
As we have stated previously, housing remains a critical need across the state, and particularly in Maui 
County. We are excited about the Kauhale Initiative and are encouraged to see a number of these 
communities beginning to take shape throughout the state. 
 
Addressing the housing crisis and rising rents requires a combination of solutions, and we are hopeful 
that more Kauhale will be developed on Maui. 
 
For these reasons, the Maui Chamber of Commerce fully supports HB431 HD2 and respectfully urges 
its passage. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Pamela Tumpap 
President 
I4‘!
(_
AD
\vl
‘
MAUI
Cl-[AMBEROF COMMERCE
VOICE OF BUSINESS
\/\ ‘
£51, <5%’/)/

 
Wednesday, March 12, 2025  
Sen. Joy A. San Buenaventura, Chair, Senate Committee on Health and Human Services 
Sen. Stanley Chang, Chair, Senate Committee on Housing 
Members of the Senate Committees on Health and Human Services and Housing 
 
Testimony in Support of H.B. 431, H.D. 2, Relating to Housing 
Thank you for this opportunity to provide written testimony on H.B. 431, H.D. 2. My name is 
Sandra Oshiro, and I coordinate the Hawaii Young Adults in Transition, a support group for individuals 
on the autism spectrum and their families. 
 
 
H.B. 431 seeks to serve populations in the state who are homeless or in danger of homelessness. 
Among them are those with intellectual or developmental disabilities, including individuals with autism 
spectrum disorder (ASD) such as my daughter. ASD is a growing health issue and a lifelong disability. 
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that it now affects 1 in 36 people. 
Many adults on the autism spectrum have difficulty finding employment and housing because of 
intellectual, communication, and mental health challenges. Without the support of family members, 
including aging parents who will soon be unable to care for them, individuals with ASD can find 
themselves living on the streets. 
 
Supportive housing is a lifeline for this population. The bill helps ensure individuals with 
disabilities receive not just shelter, but also essential services that would enable them to live 
independently. The bill would ensure funding is available to create and sustain housing with built-in 
supports. Given stable, supported housing, individuals with IDD can contribute to their communities 
through employment, volunteerism, and civic engagement. 
The bill’s flexibility in funding mixed-income rental projects helps ensure that IDD individuals 
are integrated into the community rather than segregated in siloed housing. The proposal aligns with 
federal priorities such as the Olmstead decision, which mandates community-based living for 
individuals with disabilities whenever appropriate. 
States that have invested in supportive housing for IDD populations have seen long-term success 
in reducing homelessness and improving individuals’ quality of life. We urge you to support H.B. 431 as 
a necessary step toward ensuring sustainable housing for those who are among the most vulnerable in 
our communities. 
Thank you, 
Sandra Oshiro 
ssoshiro@gmail.com 

 
 
TO:  
 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 
 
 
The Honorable Senator Joy A. San Buenaventura, Chair 
 
 
The Honorable Senator Henry J.C. Aquino, Vice Chair, and 
 
 
Members of the Committee  
 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON HOUSING  
The Honorable Senator Stanley Chang, Chair  
The Honorable Senator Troy N. Hashimoto, Vice Chair, and  
Members of the Committee 
  
FROM:  
Micah A. Kāne, CEO & President  
   
RE:  
Testimony in Support for HB 431 HD2, Relating to Housing 
DATE:   
Wednesday, March 12, 2025 at 1:05pm 
PLACE: 
Conference Room 225 
 
 
The Hawaiʻi Community Foundation (HCF) supports HB 431 HD 2, which continues to fund 
and support the Kauhale Initiative to provide creative solutions to combat homelessness. In 
addition, the bill bolsters the state’s eƯorts to create safe supportive housing options for the 
community.  
 
HCF’s CHANGE Framework identiﬁes six essential sectors for commitment to create a better 
Hawai‘i. The goals of HB 431 HD 2 ﬁt within both the “C” sector for Community-Centered 
Economy and “H” sector for Health and Wellness. 
 
Hawaiʻi faces one of the highest homelessness levels of any state, currently experiencing a 
rate of more than 40 houseless residents per 10,000 individuals. The high cost of living, 
relative low wages, and limited housing supply create a challenging environment that push 
many individuals and families to make diƯicult choices about how to spend their limited 
resources. Just one ﬁnancial setback can be the diƯerence between skipping a meal, 
forgoing desperately needed medicine, or missing a rental payment. For anyone that loses 
the security of their own home, it is imperative to ﬁnd a new, stable shelter as quickly as 
possible. 
 
The Kauhale Initiative is just the type of solution that Hawaiʻi needs. It promotes cost-
eƯective shared spaces that allow residents to take ownership and responsibility for the 
#4 HaVVai‘i
hawaiicowmzzmif3)f0u1/Ldarion.0T3
Q
§
Z 6
827F rtSt
tMa||H
olul
H
"'96813
Q
Q $6
9
.
Q
ree
On
U,
aWa||
ﬂu. Foundatlon
mm sos-537-6333 FAX 808-521-6286
Q Q; Q 3‘
'

 
 
physical place and each other. By expanding this program, the state can provide a greater 
safety net for the most vulnerable population. Furthermore, the supportive housing programs 
facilitate care and treatment opportunities for individuals with disabilities, those dealing with 
mental health illnesses, others battling substance abuse, and more. These services are 
critical to facilitate healing and stability.  
 
HCF supports the Kauhale Initiative because it has already demonstrated success. By 
appropriating additional funds, the state can continue its eƯorts to reduce homelessness 
and demonstrate the care and compassion that is appropriate when assisting people that 
are facing these tremendous challenges.   
 
Thank you for considering HCF’s testimony in support of HB 431 HD 2. Homelessness is a 
critical issue for all of Hawaiʻi and the potential beneﬁts of these sensible programs will be 
felt far and wide. 
#4 HaVVai‘i
hawaiicowmzzmif3)f0u1/Ldarion.0T3
Q
§
Z 6
827F rtSt
tMa||H
olul
H
"'96813
Q
Q $6
9
.
Q
ree
On
U,
aWa||
ﬂu. Foundatlon
mm 808-537-6333 FAX 808-521-6286
Q Q; Q 3‘
'

AK PACIFIC HOUSING
ASSISTANCE CORPORATICN
888 lwilei Road, Suite 200
Honolulu, H.1wali968l7
In Support of HB431 HD2
Hawaii Senator Joy A. San Buenaventura, Health and Human Services Chair
Hawaii Senator Henry J.C. Aquino, Health and Human Services Vice Chair
Hawaii Senator Stanley Chang, Housing Chair
Hawaii Senator Troy N. Hashimoto, Housing Vice Chair
Members of the Health & Human Services and Housing Committee
Paciﬁc Housing Assistance Corporation, a Hawaii-based nonproﬁt, develops and manages affordable
housing for very low—to moderate-income families, seniors, and individuals with special needs. Over the
past 44 years, we’ve collaborated with nonproﬁt service providers to construct, acquire, or renovate 3]
projects, offering 338 permanent supportive housing units for very low-income individuals with physical,
intellectual, developmental, and severe mental disabilities and other special needs populations.
We strongly support H B431 HD2, which seeks to continue implementing the Kauhale initiative, establish
the supportive housing special fund, and allocate critical funding to address the increasing needs of
Hawaii’s homeless and special needs population.
There is a critical need for affordable rental housing that combines supportive services and rental
assistance to promote stability, health, and independence for veterans, formerly incarcerated individuals,
domestic violence survivors, people with disabilities, youth aging out of foster care, and others.
This legislation enhances Hawaii Housing Finance and Development Corporation’s ability to collaborate
with developers to create supportive housing units for stand-alone or mixed-income rental projects. The
ﬂexible funding provided through HB431 HD2 will play a key role in supporting development,
operational costs, and delivering essential supportive services across the state.
The bill’s emphasis on partnerships among government agencies, non-proﬁt organizations, and private
sector stakeholders aligns with PHAC’s mission to promote sustainable housing solutions. Supportive
housing is more than just a response to housing challenges. It is a foundation for building strong,
inclusive communities where individuals can thrive.
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of HB43l HD2. We appreciate your
commitment to ensure Hawaii continues to build on the progress made through the Kauhale initiative and
to address the critical housing needs of our most vulnerable residents.
Sincerely,
Audrey E. Awaya
Executive Director

 
 
 
 
Testimony of the Hawai‘i Appleseed Center for Law and Economic Justice 
Support for HB431 HD2 - Relating to Housing 
Senate Committees on Health & Human Services and Housing 
Wednesday, March 12, 2025 at 1:05PM Conf. Rm. 225 and via Videoconference 
 
Aloha Chair Buena Ventura, Chair Chang, Vice Chair Aquino, Vice Chair Hashimoto and 
members of the committee: 
Mahalo for the opportunity to testify in strong support of HB431 HD2, which would establish 
and appropriate funds into the Supportive Housing Special Fund and appropriate funds for the 
state's Kahaule initiative. This bill represents a critical step toward reducing chronic 
homelessness, promoting public health, and enhancing social stability 
Hawai‘i has one of the highest per capita homelessness rates in the nation, with the 2024 
Point-in-Time Count reporting 6,389 individuals experiencing homelessness statewide. 
There is an urgent need to support our unsheltered community. 
HB431 HD2 recognizes that housing is the solution to houselessness. The Kauhale Initiative 
facilitates the rapid development of transitional and bridge housing options to help people move 
off the streets into stable shelter. By appropriating funds for this initiative, HB431 HD1 enables 
the state to continue providing flexible, community-driven housing models that address 
short-term housing needs.  
While these temporary solutions are essential, permanent deeply affordable housing remains 
key to ending homelessness. The state will be able to provide such units through the 
establishment and appropriations of the Supportive Housing Special Fund under HHFDC to 
fund three critical components: 
1.​ Cost of development of supportive housing units. 
2.​ Cost of operations and maintenance, including rental assistance. 
3.​ Cost of provision of supportive services. 
The SHSF will improve coordination between housing development, rental assistance, and 
support services to create an effective and transparent system for service providers, developers, 
and vulnerable populations. These target populations include homeless individuals, domestic 
violence victims, kupuna, disabled persons, youth, veterans, and other groups with acute needs. 
The SHSF will facilitate the development of mixed-income rental housing projects with 
dedicated units for supportive housing. By integrating supportive units into broader housing 
developments, HHFDC will be able to ensure fiscal viability. Mixed-income rental housing also 
allows these individuals to live alongside diverse populations, which is critical to supporting 
long-term stability. With the addition of funds being able to be used for rental assistance, the 
HAWAII APPLESEED
CENTER FOR LAW & ECONOMIC JUSTICE

 
 
 
 
Testimony of the Hawai‘i Appleseed Center for Law and Economic Justice 
Support for HB431 HD2 - Relating to Housing 
Senate Committees on Health & Human Services and Housing 
Wednesday, March 12, 2025 at 1:05PM Conf. Rm. 225 and via Videoconference 
 
SHSF enables deep affordability for individuals who would otherwise not be able to afford 
shelter.  
Supportive housing programs have placed hundreds of homeless families and those at risk into 
safe housing. The supportive, wraparound services include essential services such as case 
management, counseling, and employment support to help tenants overcome barriers to 
permanent housing and independence.  
Studies consistently show that when individuals gain access to stable housing, they are more 
likely to voluntarily engage in substance use disorder treatment, mental health services, and 
other economic mobility opportunities. Housing First programs nationwide report that 50-60% of 
residents participate in substance abuse treatment when services are provided, demonstrating 
the critical role of supportive housing in promoting self-sufficiency and well-being. 
Stable housing leads to better health outcomes and reduces reliance on emergency services, 
while fostering community well-being and public safety. Continued state investment in 
housing-first solutions is essential for building a resilient, inclusive, and healthy Hawai‘i. We urge 
the committee to pass HB431 HD2. 
Mahalo for the opportunity to testify. 
 
 
 
 
 
HAWAII APPLESEED
CENTER FOR LAW & ECONOMIC JUSTICE

 
 
 
 
 
 
677 Ala Moana Blvd. Suite 226 * Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96813 
www.hhhrc.org 
To: Committee on Health and Human Services and Committee on Housing 
 
Hearing Date/Time: Wednesday March 12, 2025 1:05 PM 
Re: Testimony in Support of HB 431 HD2 
Dear Chair San Buenaventura, Chair Chang and Members of the Committees: 
 
The Hawaii Health & Harm Reduction Center (HHHRC) supports HB 431 HD 2 which 
appropriates funds for the Kauhale Initiative.  HHHRC currently operates a Kauhale and has 
found that this intentional community building model is very successful in creating sustainable 
housing and supporting residents in meeting their needs and goals. 
HHHRC’s mission is to reduce harm, promote health, create wellness and fight stigma in Hawaii 
and the Pacific.  We focus our efforts on those disproportionately affected by social 
determinants of health, including but not limited to: people living with and/or affected by HIV, 
hepatitis, substance use, and the transgender, LGBQ and the Native Hawaiian communities.    
We know that in order to end homelessness, we will need more than 4000 units to meet the 
needs of the current community of unsheltered individuals and families.  The Kauhale Iniaitive 
is able to meet the diverse needs of housing (long-term, temporary, supportive programs 
included, population-focused, etc).  Funding this intiiative will move us in this direction and is 
much needed. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.  
Heather Lusk, Executive Director, Hawaii Health and Harm Reduction Center 
 
HA\X/A|'| HEALTH
& HARM REDUCTION CENTER
The New Chapterfor Life Foundation and The CHOW Project

March 10, 2025 
 
Senate Committees on Health and Human Services and Housing 
Senators Joy A. San Buenaventura and Stanley Chang, Chairs 
Senators Henry J.C. Aquino and Troy N. Hashimoto, Vice Chairs 
Senators Jarrett Keohokalole, Kurt Fevella, and Dru Mamo Kanuha, Members 
 
 
RE:  
HB 431 RELATING TO HOUSING – SUPPORT 
 
Dear Chairs San Buenaventura and Chang, Vice Chairs Aquino and Hashimoto, and Committee 
Members, 
 
I am submitting this letter in support of HB 431 on behalf of Easterseals Hawaii. Easterseals 
Hawaii served 2,025 Hawaii community members with intellectual and developmental 
disabilities (I/DD) in 2024. Our purpose is to create a more equitable world where people with 
I/DD can choose their own path.  
 
HB 431 funds supportive housing for individuals with disabilities. Hawaii has one of the highest 
homelessness rates in the nation,1 and people with disabilities are disproportionately affected 
by homelessness.2 It is therefore critical to address the growing need for housing support in 
Hawaii, especially for individuals with disabilities who need supportive services along with 
affordable housing. This bill will do so by funding the Kauhale initiative and creating a 
supportive housing special fund. 
 
Easterseals Hawaii supports HB 431 and respectfully requests your “aye” vote. 
 
Mahalo for the opportunity to submit this letter. 
 
 
 
 
Rachel Liebert Lewis 
Director, Public Policy and Advocacy 
Easterseals Hawaii 
PublicPolicyAndAdvocacy@eshawaii.org 
 
1 https://usafacts.org/articles/which-states-have-the-highest-and-lowest-rates-of-homelessness/  
2 https://www.naccho.org/blog/articles/homelessness-among-individuals-with-disabilities-influential-factors-and-
scalable-solutions  
I.I
.
0'0
-I-Iljéasterseals
F -.
Hawaii
£6/6%
T
EastersealsHawaii.org
- 710GreenSt.
-
Honolulu, H|96813
-
808.536.1015
_

 
Young Democrats of Hawai’i 
 
 
 
youngdemshawaii.org  
⬩ 
goydhi@gmail.com 
⬩ 
@youngdemshi 
 
Executive Board: 
 
Cori Terayama 
President  
 
 
Cameron Deptula 
Vice-President  
 
 
Jimmy Nguyen 
Secretary 
 
 
Isaiah Baclaan 
Treasurer 
 
 
Cindy Ing 
Young Democrats of 
America National 
Committeewoman 
 
 
Maria Glodilet 
Rallojay 
Membership and 
Events Director 
 
 
Dave Nagaji 
Campaign Director 
 
 
Jennifer Tse 
Policy and Research 
Director  
March 12, 2025 
 
 RE:     Testimony in Support of HB431 HD2, Relating to Housing 
Hearing Date: Wednesday, March 12, 2025 at 1:05 PM 
Conference Room: 225 
         
Aloha e Chair Buenaventura and Chang, Vice Chair Aquino and Hashimoto, 
Members of the Senate Committee on Health and Human Services, and Members 
of the Committee on Housing, 
 
The Young Democrats of Hawai‘i (YDHI) SUPPORTS HB431 HD2, 
RELATING TO HOUSING.  
 
HB431 HD2 would appropriate funds for the continued operation of the Kauhale 
Initiative and authorizes those funds to be used for the Ohana Zones Pilot 
Program and would also establish and appropriate funds into and out of the 
Supportive Housing Special Fund. Effective 6/29/3000.  
 
YDHI supports this bill because young adults, particularly those who are aging 
out of foster care or facing financial struggled, would benefit immensely from 
deeply affordable and permanent housing. As the cost of living continues to rise 
while wages fail to keep pace, young adults are at serious risk of homelessness.  
 
The Kauhale Initiative is more than just another affordable housing option—it has 
the potential to foster a supportive, intergenerational community where residents 
can share resources, learn from one another, and develop a strong sense of 
belonging. Stable housing provides young adults with the foundation they need to 
pursue education, secure employment, and build pathways to long-term success. 
Without deeply affordable housing, many will continue to struggle in a cycle of 
poverty and housing instability. Investing in the Kauhale Initiative is an 
investment in the future, ensuring that young adults have the opportunity to 
achieve independence and contribute meaningfully to their communities.  
 
YDHI is an organization whose mission is to increase the political strength of 
young democrats between 18 and 35 years old by providing opportunities for 
civic engagement, political advocacy, and participation in the Democratic Party of 
Hawai‘i. YDHI consists of over 1,600 members.  
 
'
¢
Q. 1?
i
7."
.
‘1
\
\
‘ V
\
/'v
‘
morn nsmocmm or uuuuu-1
\ in-i
.1’
~.

 
Young Democrats of Hawai’i 
 
 
 
youngdemshawaii.org  
⬩ 
goydhi@gmail.com 
⬩ 
@youngdemshi 
Mahalo nui loa for the opportunity to testify in SUPPORT of HB431 HD2, 
RELATING TO HOUSING.  
 
'
¢
Q. 1?
i
7."
.
‘1
\
\
‘ V
\
/'v
‘
morn nsmocmm or uuuuu-1
\ in-i
.1’
~.

 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF HB431 HD2, RELATING TO HOUSING 
 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON HOUSING 
March 12, 2025 
 
Aloha Chair(s) San Buenaventura & Chang, Vice Chair(s) Aquino & Hashimoto, Members of the 
Health & Human Services and Housing Committees: 
 
The Democratic Party of Hawai’i SUPPORTS HB431 HD2, RELATING TO HOUSING. Pursuant 
to the Platform of the Democratic Party of Hawai’i, the Party supports policies that re-houses 
families and individuals experiencing houselessness as quickly and efficiently as possible, while 
also providing wrap-around services in the process.  
 
This measure would support efforts to improve the living standards of members of our 
community who are struggling with houselessness and housing instability by providing further 
funds towards the Kauhale Initiative. This measure would also create the Supportive Housing 
Special Fund, dedicating resources towards keeping more of Hawaii’s people housed. Long 
term housing will bring stability, community, and the ability for more people to access the 
support that they need.  
 
Mahalo nui loa for the opportunity to testify in support of HB431 HD2, RELATING TO 
HOUSING. Should you have any questions or require further information, please contact the 
Democratic Party of Hawai’i at legislation@hawaiidemocrats.org. 
 
 
DEMOCRATIC PARTY OF HAWAIʻI 
PO Box 2041 ● Honolulu, HI 96805 ● www.hawaiidemocrats.org 
*4’/C PARTY O“
<3<~
e
4,00 ég

 
 
TO: ​
Honorable Senator Joy A. San Buenaventura​
Chair, Senate Committee on Health and Human Services 
 
Honorable Senator Stanley Chang​
Chair, Senate Committee on Housing 
FROM: ​
Angie Knight, Community Relations Manager​
IHS, Institute for Human Services, Inc. 
RE: ​
​
HB 431 HD2 - Relating to Housing 
DATE: ​
March 11, 2025 
POSITION: ​
IHS supports the passing of HB 431 HD2 
 
IHS, The Institute for Human Services, supports the passing of HB431 HD2. Since it began in 
2016, the Kauhale Initiative has been able to establish temporary housing and shelter for a wide 
range of individuals experiencing homelessness. The initiative allows the homeless services' 
continuum of providers to hone in on specific populations and address specialized needs, 
helping more individuals get into shelter and off the streets and further on their path to 
permanent housing, such as formerly homeless families, those in substance use recovery, 
reentry following incarceration, and more. 
 
Expanding the budget for the Kauhale Initiative allows current providers' operating sites to have 
stability for programs to help individuals within their care and more in the coming years. 
Moreover, it allows the creation of new sites with different focus populations. Moreover, creating 
a special fund to promote the development of permanent supportive housing addresses one of 
our community’s current bottlenecks: individuals ready for permanent housing but with few 
options for the supportive services they need at their often fixed income rate. 
 
Mahalo, thank you for the opportunity to testify and support the passing of this critical legislation 
to fund part of our homeless service’s continuum of care.  
 

HB-431-HD-2 
Submitted on: 3/11/2025 1:02:14 AM 
Testimony for HHS on 3/12/2025 1:05:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Ellen Awai 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I support HB431.HD2. funding for Kauhale Housing. 
 

HB-431-HD-2 
Submitted on: 3/9/2025 9:41:21 AM 
Testimony for HHS on 3/12/2025 1:05:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
David Ball 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
To the members of the Committee, 
I write in strong support of this measure to strengthen our provision of needed shelter and 
services to our houseless population. Our society and government are only as strong as our 
support for our most vulnerable citizens. Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Sincerely yours, 
David Ball, Waialae-Kahala 
 

Aloha Chairs, Vice Chairs, and Members of the Committees:  
 
I strongly support bill HB431 HD2. Governor Green’s kauhale initiative is a unique approach to 
providing necessary health care and social services to people experiencing houselessness while 
also increasing Hawai‘i’s housing inventory.  
Please see the following page for supplemental information on houselessness in Hawai‘i and the 
impact of the state’s current kauhale villages.  
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
 
Sincerely,  
Faizah Shyanguya 

PASS HB431 HD2
H O U S I N G
INCREASE HAWAI‘I’S HOUSING WI TH THE KAUHALE INI TIATIVE
6,389
PEOPLE 
EXPERIENCED
HOUSELESSNESS
4,494
O‘AHU
718
HAWAI‘I ISLAND
654
MAUI
523
KAUA‘I
18
KAUHALE
VILLAGES
These villages have a total of
835
beds.
Governor
Green
hopes Hawai‘i will build up to 30
villages statewide by 2026.
76%
reduction
in
HEALTHCARE COSTS
CALL TO ACTION:
Pass HB431 HD2 with an
amendment to change the
effective dates to June 29,
2025, and July 1, 2025.
Faizah Shyanguya
Master of Public Health Student
faishyanguya@gmail.com
ON A SINGLE NIGHT IN 2024
Ka Mana O Na Helu (2024); Partners in Care (2024)
Ka Mana O Na Helu (2024); Partners in Care (2024)
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (2024)
0
2000
4000
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
Transitional Housing Inventory
O‘ahu Transitional Shelter/Housing
Maui, Kaua‘i, and Hawai‘i Island Shelter/Housing
Bridging the Gap & Partners in Care (2015-2022)
Andrew Gomes, Hawai‘i Tribune-Herald (2025)
Many lawmakers acknowledge 
that houselessness is a crisis in 
Hawai‘i. 
People 
experiencing 
chronic houselessness have a 
greater 
risk 
of 
physical 
ailments, 
mental 
health 
conditions, decreased access to 
health care services, and death.
Supporting HB431 HD2 will fund 
a deeply affordable housing 
solution 
that 
can 
stabilize 
hundreds 
of 
houseless 
individuals 
who 
are 
constituents. Kauhale villages 
add beds to the transitional 
shelter/housing inventory.
The per-person cost of housing 
individuals in a kauhale is often 
less than the per-person cost of 
assisting unsheltered individuals 
on the streets.
Garcia, Doran, Kushel (2024)
Stewart Yerton, Honolulu Civil Beat (2025)
