 
 
 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAI῾I 
                                                       KA MOKU‘ĀINA O HAWAI‘I 
                                 STATE COUNCIL ON DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES 
                                'A'UNIKE MOKU'ĀPUNI NO KA NĀ KĀWAI KULA 
PRINCESS VICTORIA KAMĀMALU BUILDING 
1010 RICHARDS STREET, Room 122 
HONOLULU, HAWAI῾I  96813 
TELEPHONE: (808) 586-8100    FAX: (808) 586-7543 
 
February 12, 2025 
 
The Honorable Representative Luke A. Evslin, Chair 
House Committee on Housing   
 The Thirty-Third Legislature  
State Capitol 
State of Hawai῾i 
Honolulu, Hawai῾i 96813 
 
Dear Representative Evslin, and Committee Members: 
 
SUBJECT: HB431 HD1 Relating to Housing 
The Hawaii State Council on Developmental Disabilities STRONGLY SUPPORTS 
HB431 HD1, which appropriates funds for the Kauhale Initiative. Establishes and appropriates 
funds into and out of the Supportive Housing Special Fund.   
This bill represents a critical step forward in meeting the housing needs of Hawai‘i’s 
most vulnerable populations, including individuals with intellectual and developmental 
disabilities (I/DD). Hawai‘i’s I/DD population often faces significant barriers to accessing safe, 
stable, and affordable housing. Individuals with I/DD are more likely to experience 
unemployment, limited income, and social isolation, making it exceedingly difficult to secure 
independent housing. HB431 provides a pathway to addressing these systemic challenges by 
ensuring that housing is affordable and integrated with services necessary for residents to 
thrive. 
Supportive services funded under this bill, such as case management, life skills training, 
and assistance with daily living activities, are vital for individuals with I/DD to live independently 
and participate fully in their communities. The promotion of mixed-income rental housing 
developments, as outlined in HB431, fosters inclusive environments where individuals with 
I/DD can live alongside diverse populations. This approach reduces stigma and encourages 
greater community understanding and acceptance of individuals with disabilities. 
By addressing housing insecurity and ensuring access to integrated support services, 
HB431 will enable individuals with I/DD to live more independently and with dignity, reduce 

HB431HD1 Relating to Housing  
February 12, 2025 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
reliance on costly institutional care or emergency services, and improve overall health, social 
inclusion, and quality of life for individuals with I/DD.  
The DD Council believes that the passage of HB431 will have transformative impacts on 
Hawai‘i’s I/DD community, providing them with the stability and support they need to lead 
fulfilling and independent lives. We urge you to pass this bill to ensure that the needs of 
individuals with I/DD and other vulnerable populations are prioritized in Hawai‘i’s housing 
solutions. Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in strong support of HB431 
HD1.   
Sincerely, 
 
Daintry Bartoldus 
Executive Administrator 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
LT. GOVERNOR 
 
 
 
 
 
DEAN MINAKAMI 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAII 
DEPARTMENT OF BUSINESS, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND TOURISM  
HAWAII HOUSING FINANCE AND DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 
677 QUEEN STREET, SUITE 300 
HONOLULU, HAWAII 96813 
FAX: (808) 587-0600 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Statement of 
DEAN MINAKAMI 
Hawaii Housing Finance and Development Corporation 
Before the 
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON HOUSING 
February 12, 2025 at 9:00 a.m. 
State Capitol, Room 430 
In consideration of 
H.B. 431 HD1 
RELATING TO HOUSING. 
Chair Evslin, Vice Chair Miyake, and members of the Committee.   
HHFDC supports HB 431 HD1, which appropriates funds for the Kauhale Initiative. It 
also establishes and appropriates funds into and out of the Supportive Housing Special 
Fund. HHFDC supports the measure so long as it does not adversely impact priorities 
identified in the Executive Budget Request for FY 2026. 
HHFDC agrees that supportive housing is an innovative solution to house special needs 
populations, including the chronically homeless, individuals with disabilities, individuals 
transitioning from incarceration, youth aging out of foster care, domestic violence 
survivors, veterans, those suffering from substance abuse, and the frail elderly.  
The Supportive Housing Special Fund is a new financing tool that will help HHFDC to 
facilitate the development of supportive housing units in standalone projects or 
integrated in mixed-income rental housing projects. 
HHFDC supports the establishment of one full-time equivalent (1.0 FTE) housing 
finance specialist I position to help with the administration of the supportive housing 
special fund.  
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this bill. 

STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND FINANCE 
Ka ʻOihana Mālama Mo‘ohelu a Kālā 
P.O. BOX 150 
HONOLULU, HAWAI‘I  96810-0150 
 
 
 
JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
LUIS P. SALAVERIA 
GOVERNOR 
DIRECTOR 
 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
 
SABRINA NASIR 
LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR 
DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADMINISTRATIVE AND RESEARCH OFFICE 
EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM 
 
BUDGET, PROGRAM PLANNING AND MANAGEMENT DIVISION 
HAWAI‘I EMPLOYER-UNION HEALTH BENEFITS TRUST FUND 
 
FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION DIVISION 
OFFICE OF THE PUBLIC DEFENDER 
 
OFFICE OF FEDERAL AWARDS MANAGEMENT 
 
 
 
 
No. 1 Capitol District Building, 250 S. Hotel Street, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813 
 
WRITTEN ONLY 
TESTIMONY BY LUIS P. SALAVERIA 
DIRECTOR, DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND FINANCE 
TO THE HOUSE COMMITTEE ON HOUSING 
ON 
HOUSE BILL NO. 431, H.D. 1 
 
February 12, 2025 
9:00 a.m. 
Room 430 and Videoconference 
 
 
RELATING TO HOUSING 
 
The Department of Budget and Finance (B&F) offers comments on this bill. 
 
House Bill (H.B.) No. 431, H.D. 1, appropriates an unspecified amount of general 
funds in both FY 26 and FY 27 to the Office of the Governor (GOV) for the continued 
operation of the Kauhale Initiative and provides that the appropriations may be 
transferred to designated departments or agencies for expenditure; establishes the 
Supportive Housing Special Fund (SHSF) to be administered by the Hawai‘i Housing 
Finance and Development Corporation to facilitate the development of mixed-income 
rental housing projects with supportive housing provisions for individuals and families 
with special needs; appropriates an unspecified amount of general funds in both FY 26 
and FY 27 for deposit into the SHSF and appropriates an unspecified amount of special 
fund ceiling for the SHSF in both FY 26 and FY 27; and appropriates an unspecified 
amount of general funds in both FY 26 and FY 27 to GOV to assist the Statewide Office 
of Homelessness and Housing Solutions in implementing the Kauhale Initiative. 
 
 

 
-2- 
 
 
 
 
As a matter of general policy, B&F does not support the creation of any special 
fund, which does not meet the requirements of Section 37-52.3, HRS.  Special funds 
should:  1) serve a need as demonstrated by the purpose, scope of work, and an 
explanation why the program cannot be implemented successfully under the general 
fund appropriation process; 2) reflect a clear nexus between the benefits sought and 
charges made upon the users or beneficiaries or a clear link between the program and 
the sources of revenue; 3) provide an appropriate means of financing for the program or 
activity; and 4) demonstrate the capacity to be financially self-sustaining.  Regarding 
H.B. No. 431, H.D. 1, it is difficult to determine whether the proposed SHSF would be 
self-sustaining. 
 
Thank you for your consideration of our comments. 

 
 
AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY AGENCY 
 
JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR  
KE KIAʻĀINA  
  
  
 
 
  
STATE OF HAWAII  
KA MOKUʻĀINA O HAWAIʻI  
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES  
KA ʻOIHANA MĀLAMA LAWELAWE KANAKA  
Office of the Director  
P. O. Box 339  
Honolulu, Hawaii 96809-0339  
 
February 10, 2025 
  
RYAN I. YAMANE 
DIRECTOR  
KA LUNA HOʻOKELE 
  
  
JOSEPH CAMPOS II  
DEPUTY DIRECTOR  
KA HOPE LUNA HOʻOKELE  
   
  
 TRISTA SPEER  
DEPUTY DIRECTOR  
KA HOPE LUNA HOʻOKELE  
 
  
  
  
TO: 
 
The Honorable Representative Lisa Marten, Chair 
 
 
House Committee on Human Services & Homelessness 
 
FROM:  
Ryan I. Yamane, Director 
 
SUBJECT: 
HB  431 – RELATING TO HOUSING. 
 
 
 
Hearing: 
January 28, 2025,  9:00 a.m. 
 
 
 
 
Conference Room 239 & Videoconference, State Capitol 
 
DEPARTMENT’S POSITION:  The Department of Human Services (DHS) supports the 
intent of this measure that invests in the Kauhale initiative and permanent supportive housing 
as strategies to reduce homelessness.  DHS defers to the Hawaii Housing Finance and 
Development Corporation (HHFDC), the Department of Budget & Finance (B&F), the State 
Office on Homelessness & Housing Solutions (SOHHS), and the Counties.  DHS respectfully 
requests that any appropriation not reduce or replace budget priorities identified in the 
executive budget. 
PURPOSE:  Appropriates funds for the Kauhale Initiative.  Establishes and appropriates 
funds into and out of the Supportive Housing Special Fund. Effective 6/29/3000. (HD1) 
The House Committee on Human Services & Homelessness amended the measure by: 
(1) Changing the appropriations to unspecified amounts; 
(2) Deleting language that attempted to prevent the proper lapse of a general fund 
appropriation at the end of the fiscal biennium for which the appropriation was 
made; 
(3) Deleting language that would have established the Kauhale Initiative Special Fund; 

February 10, 2025 
Page 2 
 
 
AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY AGENCY 
 
(4) Inserting language that appropriates an unspecified amount to assist the Statewide 
Office on Homelessness and Housing Solutions in implementing the Kauhale 
Initiative; 
(5) Changing the effective dates to June 29, 3000, and July 1, 3000, respectively, to 
encourage further discussion; and 
(6) Making technical, nonsubstantive amendments for the purposes of clarity, 
consistency, and style. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments on this measure. 

E X E C U T I V E  C H A M B E R S  
K E  K E ʻ E N A  O  K E  K I A ʻ Ā I N A  
 JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JOHN MIZUNO 
 
GOVERNOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    DIRECTOR 
 
KE KIAʻĀINA 
 
 
STATEWIDE OFFICE ON HOMELESSNESS & HOUSING SOLUTIONS 
Testimony of John M. Mizuno 
Governor’s Coordinator on Homelessness 
Before the 
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON HOUSING 
Wednesday, February 12, 2025 
9:00 a.m. 
Conference Room 430, State Capitol 
 
In consideration of 
House Bill No. 431 HD1 
RELATING TO HOUSING 
 
 
Aloha Chair Evslin, Vice Chair Miyake, and Committee Members, 
 
My name is John Mizuno. I am the Governor’s Coordinator on Homelessness and the Director of 
the Statewide Office on Homelessness and Housing Solutions (SOHHS). 
 
First, on behalf of my office and Governor Green, I want to thank the House of Representatives 
and the Majority Caucus for introducing HB431 HD1. 
 
I am writing in strong support of House Bill 431 HD1, which appropriates funds to the 
Statewide Office on Homelessness and Housing Solutions (SOHHS) for the continued 
implementation of Governor Green’s Kauhale Initiative.  
 
House Bill 431 HD1 also establishes a Supportive Housing Special Fund to be administered by 
the Hawaii Housing Finance and Development Corporation (HHFDC), appropriates funds to 
support the development, operation, and maintenance of supportive housing and the provision 
of supportive services, and establishes within the HHFDC, a one full-time housing finance 
specialist I position to help with the administration of the supportive housing special fund. 
 
Homelessness in Hawaii is not just a statistic; it's a pressing issue that demands our immediate 
attention. For over a decade, our state has consistently ranked among the top five in rates of 
per capita homelessness. The most recent Point in Time Count (PIT Count) in January 2024 
revealed that 6,389 people in our state were experiencing homelessness, with the majority on 
Oahu. These numbers are not just figures. They represent individuals and families in desperate 
need of our help. We cannot afford to delay in addressing this crisis.  
 
 

John M. Mizuno Testimony on HB431 HD1 
House Committee on Housing 
Wednesday, February 12, 2025 
Page 2 
 
While the issue of homelessness remains, Hawaii has made significant strides.  In 2024, SOHHS 
set new priorities, including the ambitious goal of halving unsheltered homelessness during 
Governor Green's Administration’s first term (by November 2026). This would mean 
transitioning approximately 2,200 people from the streets or remote areas to a home. Several 
of SOHHS’s priorities focus on expanding the deeply affordable housing inventory for houseless 
individuals, including kauhale or communal housing. We are making progress, and with the 
Legislature’s support, we can continue to move forward, seeking to become the first State in 
the union to cut chronic homelessness in half. This progress should give us all hope for a 
brighter future. 
The Kauhale initiative is not just another housing project. It is a unique and innovative approach 
that strives to demonstrate new, cost-effective models of housing and healing. It is built on the 
foundation of community and responsibility among residents. Kauhale includes many housing 
types and is sometimes envisioned as tiny homes with shared bathrooms, dining, and cooking 
facilities.  However, they could also be created in repurposed hotels, offices, buildings, 
dormitories, or apartment buildings.  If deep affordability extends from communal 
responsibility (kuleana) and ownership is built into the design and program plan, any space 
could be adapted as a kauhale. This is what makes Hawaii and our kauhale initiative different 
and unique. 
In 2024, SOHHS established seventeen Kauhale projects, and we recently added the Kulia I Ka 
Nuu Kauhale in Waianae in 2025, bringing the total to 18. Our goal is to build at least thirty 
Kauhale by November 2026, with at least three on each Neighbor Island. This ambitious plan is 
not just a government initiative but a collaborative effort that involves the Governor, the 
counties, private businesses, faith-based organizations, nonprofit organizations, service 
providers, and the community. Your support of HB431 HD1 will ensure the continued success of 
the Kauhale Initiative and its collaborative approach. 
Supportive Housing is affordable housing with wraparound support services for vulnerable 
individuals and families, including homeless individuals, domestic violence victims, kupuna, 
disabled, youth, veterans, and other sub-populations with acute needs. One example is the 
Fernhurst YWCA women’s re-entry housing program on Oahu. Funded by SOHHS, the program 
provides housing, meals, education, and employment training for women recently released 
from a correctional facility, allowing them to transition to supportive housing with wraparound 
services and potential rental subsidies. 
Thank you, Chair Evslin, Vice Chair Miyake, and Committee Members, for the opportunity to 
testify in strong support of House Bill 431 HD1. I am grateful for your consideration of this 
critical measure and your continued support in our efforts to develop solutions to end 
homelessness in our State. 
 
Mahalo! 

 
 
 
 
 
HB431 HD1 
RELATING TO HOUSING 
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON HOUSING  
 
                                                       
February 12th,2025 
9:00 a.m.   
Conference room 430 
Dear Chair Evslin, Vice Chair Miyake, members of the House Committee on Housing:  
The Office of Hawaiian Affairs (OHA) SUPPORTS HB431 HD1, which supports the 
Kauhale initiative in reducing homelessness, creating affordable housing, and fostering 
community. We recognize that physical solutions by themselves will not solve social and 
economic problems, but neither can economic vitality, community stability, and mental & 
physical health be sustained without supportive physical framework of having stable 
housing options. 
This bill is crucial as it marks a significant step towards addressing the housing 
crisis across the state of Hawai’i. We acknowledge housing is the highest cost item for 
Hawai’i families. Housing affordability has become increasingly challenging, particularly 
for Native Hawaiian families who seek to reside in Hawai’i. The growing affordable 
housing problem is one of the most critical issues faced by our communities, especially 
our Native Hawaiian communities. Many kama‘aina families struggle to find adequate 
housing and to make ends meet. A significant portion of the homeless population 
identifies as Native Hawaiian1.  
 
The Supportive Housing Special Fund would support the efforts of stable housing 
and supportive services to vulnerable populations of Hawai’i. This finance mechanism 
will assist Hawai`i Housing Finance and Development Corporation (HHFDC) to facilitate, 
coordinate, and maintain Kauhale facilities and services. This will address chronically 
unsheltered individuals, and others with special housing needs: including persons with 
addictions, youth aging out of foster care, domestic violence survivors, kupuna, people 
with mental illness, chronic health conditions, histories of trauma and other barriers. 
 
1 Homeless point-in-time count. (n.d.). 
https://www.btghawaii.org/media/uploads/2024_btg_pit_count_report_final.pdf  
 
 

 
Stable housing and adequate resources of treatment allow for the person to move towards 
permanent housing, inclusion of community, and better health overall. The center for 
budget and policy priorities found that people offered supportive housing spent 23 % 
fewer days in hospitals, had 33 % fewer emergency room visits, and spent 42 % fewer 
days in nursing homes over a year. Furthermore, supportive housing reduces recidivism. A 
study by Hawaii based organization Partners in Care revealed that the recidivism rate for 
individuals who received housing support was 12.8% versus 50% without housing 
support. This indicates that stable housing and intervention services offered through 
initiatives such as Kauhale have great impact on justice involved individuals.   
 
  
This initiative is in line with OHA’s mission to improve the conditions of Native 
Hawaiians and ensure their equitable access to quality housing, education, healthcare, 
and economic opportunities. It reflects our commitment to advancing the well-being of 
our beneficiaries and the broader community. Addressing homelessness and affordable 
housing issues is a multi-prong approach.  
 
Accordingly, OHA supports HB43 HD1, which aims to meet the urgent need for 
affordable housing and address homelesness. Mahalo for your attention and commitment 
to enhancing the well-being of our community.  

JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR 
KE KIAʻĀINA 
 
 
 
 
BONNIE KAHAKUI 
ADMINISTRATOR 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAIʻI | KA MOKUʻĀINA O HAWAIʻI 
 
STATE PROCUREMENT OFFICE 
P.O. Box 119 
Honolulu, Hawaii  96810-0119 
Tel: (808) 586-0554 
email: state.procurement.office@hawaii.gov  
http://spo.hawaii.gov 
 
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY 
OF 
BONNIE KAHAKUI, ADMINISTRATOR 
STATE PROCUREMENT OFFICE 
 
TO THE HOUSE COMMITTEE 
ON 
HOUSING 
FEBRUARY 12, 2025, 9:00 AM 
 
HOUSE BILL 431, HD1 
RELATING TO HOUSING 
 
Chair Evslin, Vice Chair Miyake, and members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity 
to submit testimony on House Bill 431, HD1. The State Procurement Office (SPO) appreciates 
the intent of this bill and recommends that the procurement exemption language noted below be 
removed 
Section 4, Page 9, lines 7 to 11: 
§201H- Supportive housing special fund. (f) “…supportive housing and services.  The 
corporation shall be exempt from chapter 103D in selecting a qualified private or 
nonprofit organization to assist with the development and maintenance of supportive 
housing and provision of rental assistance and supportive services.  The corporation 
may….” 
Exemptions to the Hawaii Procurement Code have always been a concern of the SPO.  As 
stated in the National Association of State Procurement Officials (NASPO) white paper on 
“Ethics and Accountability,” “Maintaining the integrity of public procurement is one of the most 
important pillars of government.” 
Chapter 103D, HRS, is the State's single source of public procurement policy to be applied 
equally and uniformly, while providing fairness, open competition, a level playing field, 
government disclosure, and transparency in the procurement and contracting process vital to 
good government. Public procurement's primary objective is to provide everyone equal 
opportunity to compete for government contracts, to prevent favoritism, collusion, or fraud in 

Testimony of the State Procurement Office 
House Bill 431 HD1  
 
 
 
House Committee on Housing 
February 12, 2025 
Page 2 
 
 
awarding of contracts. To legislate that any one entity should be exempt from compliance with 
both Chapters 103D and 103F, HRS, conveys a sense of disproportionate equality in the law’s 
application.  
Exemptions to the Code mean that all procurements made with taxpayer monies will not have 
the same oversight, accountability and transparency requirements mandated by those 
procurements processes provided in the code.  It means that there is no requirement for due 
diligence, proper planning, or consideration of protections for the state in contract terms and 
conditions, nor are there any set requirements to conduct cost and price analysis and market 
research or post-award contract management. As such, Agencies can choose whether to 
compete any procurement or go directly to one contractor.  It also means Agencies are not 
required to adhere to the code's procurement integrity laws.  
The National Association of State Procurement Officials states that “Businesses suffer when 
there is inconsistency in procurement laws and regulations. Complex, arcane procurement rules 
of numerous jurisdictions discourage competition by raising the costs to businesses to 
understand and comply with these different rules. Higher costs are recovered through the prices 
offered by a smaller pool of competitors, resulting in unnecessarily inflated costs to state and 
local governments.”  
Thank you. 
 

OFFICE OF HOUSING
KE KE‘ENA HO‘OL/§L§ KUKULA HALE
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU
530 SOUTH KING STREET, ROOM 306 - HONOLULU, HAWAl‘l 96813
PHONE: (808) 768-4675 - FAX: (808)768-4242 - WEBSITE: www.honolulu.gov/housing
aqnrvo,
'
or-In
‘
ctr}
5 .
~
'7
.
R'CK 3%\(*c')g|ARD'
KEVIN AUGER
:w .,—‘Y'
'. *,’= -_
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
ME“
I
£3
jl'~..r
5;
POOHOOKO
.
1“,
‘
ii
,'
»
4- '
.'>\.,~@-5'1 /-'-
- -'
‘or
February 7, 2025
2°25‘H°U‘°2°
The Honorable Luke A. Evslin, Chair
The Honorable Tyson K. Miyake, Vice Chair
and Members of the House Committee on Housing
Hawai‘i State Capitol
415 South Beretania Street
Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96813
Dear Chair Evslin, Vice Chair Miyake, and Committee Members:
SUBJECT: Testimony in Support of HB431, HD1 — Relating to Housing
Hearing: Wed., Feb. 12, 2025, 9 a.m. at the State Capitol, Rm. 430
The Office of Housing supports HB431, HD1, which would establish and
appropriate funding for a Supportive Housing Special Fund under the Hawai‘i Housing
Finance and Development Corporation (HHFDC) to support the development and
operations of supportive housing, and would also ensure the continuation of the kauhale
initiative. We recognize the necessity of facilitating housing across all incomes to
address the full spectrum of need for our residents. This bill would support community
members who are most at-risk of homelessness or may already be experiencing
homelessness, and would facilitate the creation of units that can be very challenging to
make financially feasible.
Supportive housing is a type of housing specifically for higher-needs persons that
combines housing units with rent subsidization and supportive services. This type of
housing serves households that may not otherwise be able to remain stably housed and
assists a wide variety of populations, including individuals transitioning from
incarceration, youth aging out of foster care, those experiencing homelessness,
community members challenged by mental illnesses, and persons with intellectual,
developmental, or physical disabilities. Supportive housing is a highly effective housing
intervention that helps not only those housed by these programs, but also lowers cost
burdens on our public systems, including our healthcare and incarceration systems.
We appreciate the introduction of this important measure that would increase
supportive housing options for the most vulnerable members of our community.

The Honorable Luke A. Evslin, Chair
The Honorable Tyson K. Miyake, Vice Chair
and Members of the House Committee on Housing
February 7, 2025
Page 2
.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
Very truly yours,
1,,
..
___,’_-1
Kevin D. Auger
Executive Director
APPROVED:
/Michael D. Formby, Managing Director Designate
Office of the Managing Director

C. Kimo Alameda, Ph.D.
- ‘~
. __
Mayor
Kehaulani M. Costa
W H
V
lh
J
:, _ \y;,,_,
Housing Administrator
i iam
. Bri
ante
r.
.5
I 1,
Managing Director
'3
_-'
5'
Keiko M. Mercado
Assistant Housing Administrator
Merrick Nishimoto
" 'I""">"
or
Deputy Managing Director
County of Hawai‘i
Office of Housing and Community Development
1990 Kino‘oIe Street, Suite 102 - Hilo,Hawai‘i96720 - (808)961-8379
- Fax (sos) 961-sass
Existing Housing: (sos) 959-4642 - Fax (sos) 959-9308
Kona: (208)323-4300 - Fax (sos) 323-4301
February 10, 2025
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF HOUSE BILL 431, HD1
A BILL FOR AN ACT RELATING TO HOUSING
COMMITTEE ON HOUSING
Rep. Luke A. Evslin, Chair
Rep. Tyson K. Miyake, Vice Chair
Hearing Date: Wednesday, February 12, 2025, at 9:00 AM
Place of Hearing: Conference Room 430 & Videoconference
Aloha Honorable Chairs Evslin and Miyake, and members of the Committee on
Housing,
On behalf of the County of Hawai'i Ofﬁce of Housing and Community Development
(OHCD), I am pleased to provide testimony in strong support of House Bill 431, HD1,
which will provide essential funding for the continued implementation of Governor
Green's Kauhale Initiative by the Statewide Ofﬁce on Homelessness and Housing
Solutions.
In addition, HB 431 will establish the Supportive Housing Special Fund, which will assist
the Hawai‘i Housing Finance and Development Corporation (HHFDC) in facilitating the
development of mixed-income rental housing projects. These projects will include units
speciﬁcally designated for individuals or families with special needs who require
supportive services.
This measure is a crucial step foivvard in addressing the housing needs of Hawai‘i's
most vulnerable populations. By securing additional funding for the Kauhale Initiative
and enabling HHFDC to partner with developers to create more supportive housing
units, HB 431 will directly improve the availability of safe, stable, and supportive housing
options for those in need.
Not only will this measure help fund the development of critically needed kauhale on
Hawai‘i Island, it will also support the OHCD’s ongoing efforts to increase permanent
housing opportunities across Hawai‘i Island.
EQUAL HOUSING
OPPORTUNITY

February 10, 2025
Page 2
In West Hawai‘i, the Supportive Housing Special Fund is being considered as a funding
source for the second phase of Kukuiola Village, which will include the construction of
50 permanent supportive housing units.
In East Hawai‘i, the OHCD envisions that this fund could assist with the renovation and
upgrades of the former Hilo Memorial Hospital. This facility currently houses a
supportive housing program, and expanded funding could allow it to serve additional
members of the community who need support.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in strong support of HB 431, HD1.
Passage of this measure will signiﬁcantly improve the lives of vulnerable individuals in
our community who are currently facing homelessness and housing instability.
Mahalo,
Kehaulani M. Costa
Housing Administrator

 
 
HB431 HD1 Kauhale 
 
COMMITTEE ON HOUSING 
Rep. Luke A. Evslin, Chair 
Rep. Tyson K. Miyake, Vice Chair 
Wednesday, Feb 12, 2025: 9:00: Room 430 Videoconference 
 
 
 
Hawaii Substance Abuse Coalition Supports HB431 HD1: 
 
ALOHA CHAIR, VICE CHAIR, AND DISTINGUISHED COMMITTEE MEMBERS. My 
name is Alan Johnson. I am the current chair of the Hawaii Substance Abuse Coalition 
(HSAC), a statewide organization for substance use disorder and co-occurring mental 
health disorder treatment and prevention agencies and recovery-oriented services. 
 
 
HSAC notes that formal treatment, such as residential and outpatient will be 
critically needed for Kauhale residents to 
achieve functionality and recovery.  
 
Studies show that once housed, 
feeling safe and stable, many 
homeless voluntarily seek substance 
abuse treatment because they want 
improved functionality.  
 
• For example, 50-60% of individuals in Housing First programs 
engaged in substance use disorders treatment when supportive 
services were offered. Programs offering integrated care (housing, food, 
medical care, and counseling) report higher engagement in substance abuse 
treatment, with rates often exceeding 50% in some cases. 
 
• After safe housing, homeless still are at elevated risk for 
experiencing substance use disorders (SUDs), mental disorders, 
trauma, medical conditions, employment challenges, and incarceration. Both 
treatment and housing needs must be concurrently addressed.1 
 
 
1 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2021). Behavioral Health Services for People Who 
Are Homeless. Advisory. chrome-
extension://efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj/https://library.samhsa.gov/sites/default/files/pep20-06-04-003.pdf 
Residential and Outpatient 
Substance Use Disorder funding 
has been reduced at a time when 
studies indicate that housed 
homeless will need these critical 
services.  

• Substance use, mental health, medical care, and social supports services are 
critical for mitigating risks of SUDs and mental disorders and improving 
health outcomes. 
 
• Programs using the “Housing First” model prioritize stable housing without 
requiring sobriety or participation in substance abuse treatment as a condition 
for housing. Once stabilized, motivational interviewing and harm-reduction 
strategies can encourage more people to pursue treatment. 
 
• Many homeless individuals with substance use disorders also struggle with 
mental health conditions. Addressing these conditions alongside addiction 
increases the likelihood of seeking and remaining in treatment. 
Residential and intensive outpatient treatment is vital for individuals who 
need intensive, round-the-clock care, particularly when addiction is 
severe or compounded by complex personal, social, or psychological 
challenges. It provides the stability and resources needed to build a strong 
foundation for lasting recovery. 
Providing stable housing and basic necessities significantly increases the likelihood 
that individuals will consider and engage in substance abuse treatment. Hawaii 
needs to be prepared for large numbers of Kauhale residents asking for 
treatment just at the time when capacity is insufficient to meet this need.  
 
We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony and are available for questions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
677 Ala Moana Blvd. Suite 226 * Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96813 
www.hhhrc.org 
To: Committee on Housing 
 
Hearing Date/Time: Wednesday February 12, 9:00 AM 
Re: Testimony in Support of HB 431 HD1 
Dear Chair Takayama, Vice Chair Loy and Members of the Committee 
 
The Hawaii Health & Harm Reduction Center (HHHRC) supports HB 431 HD 1 which 
appropriates funds for the Kauhale Initiative.  HHHRC currently operates a Kauhale and has 
found that this intentional community building model is very successful in creating sustainable 
housing and supporting residents in meeting their needs and goals. 
HHHRC’s mission is to reduce harm, promote health, create wellness and fight stigma in Hawaii 
and the Pacific.  We focus our efforts on those disproportionately affected by social 
determinants of health, including but not limited to: people living with and/or affected by HIV, 
hepatitis, substance use, and the transgender, LGBQ and the Native Hawaiian communities.    
We know that in order to end homelessness, we will need more than 4000 units to meet the 
needs of the current community of unsheltered individuals and families.  The Kauhale Iniaitive 
is able to meet the diverse needs of housing (long-term, temporary, supportive programs 
included, population-focused, etc).  Funding this intiiative will move us in this direction and is 
much needed. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.  
Heather Lusk, Executive Director, Hawaii Health and Harm Reduction Center 
 

 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF HB431 HD1, RELATING TO HOUSING 
 
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON HOUSING 
February 12, 2025 
 
Aloha Chair Evslin, Vice Chair Miyake, and Members of the Housing committee: 
 
The Democratic Party of Hawai’i SUPPORTS HB431 HD1, RELATING TO HOUSING. Pursuant 
to the Platform of the Democratic Party of Hawai’i, the Party supports policies that re-houses 
families and individuals experiencing houselessness as quickly and efficiently as possible, while 
also providing wrap-around services in the process.  
 
This measure would support efforts to improve the living standards of members of our 
community who are struggling with houselessness and housing instability by providing further 
funds towards the Kauhale Initiative, while supporting the work that the Statewide Office of 
Homelessness & Housing Solutions is doing to implement the initiative. This measure would 
also create the Supportive Housing Special Fund, dedicating resources towards keeping more 
of Hawaii’s people housed. Long term housing will bring stability, community, and the ability for 
more people to access the support that they need.  
 
Mahalo nui loa for the opportunity to testify in support of HB431 HD1, RELATING TO 
HOUSING. Should you have any questions or require further information, please contact the 
Democratic Party of Hawai’i at legislation@hawaiidemocrats.org. 
DEMOCRATIC PARTY OF HAWAIʻI 
PO Box 2041 ● Honolulu, HI 96805 ● www.hawaiidemocrats.org 

 
    C L A R E N C E  T .  C .  C H I N G  C A M P U S   1 8 2 2  K e ‘ e a u m o k u  S t r e e t ,  H o n o l u l u ,  H I  9 6 8 2 2  
    P h o n e  ( 8 0 8 ) 5 2 7 - 4 8 1 3    
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF HB 431 HD1: RELATING TO HOUSING 
 
TO:  
House Committee on Housing 
FROM: 
Tina Andrade, President and CEO, Catholic Charities Hawai‘i 
Hearing: 
Wednesday, 2/12/25; 9:00 AM;   CR 430 & Videoconference 
 
Chair Evslin, Vice Chair Miyake, and Members, Committee on Housing: 
 
Catholic Charities Hawai`i strongly supports HB 431 HD1, which appropriates funds for the 
Kauhale Initiative, and funds into and out of the Supportive Housing Special Fund.   
 
Catholic Charities Hawai`i (CCH) is a tax exempt, non-profit agency that has been providing 
social services in Hawai`i for over 75 years.  CCH has programs serving elders, children, 
families, homeless and immigrants.  Our mission is to provide services and advocacy to the most 
vulnerable of the people in Hawai`i.  We assist over 40,000 people annually across the state and 
have a long history of addressing affordable housing and homelessness. 
 
These initiatives are crucial steps towards addressing the homelessness crisis in Hawai`i.  On 
Oahu, 62% of homeless persons are unsheltered. The Kauhale Initiative provides an 
opportunity for more rapid development of diverse options to help people move off the streets 
into transitional and bridge units that are much needed.  Along with these options, a strong and 
ongoing focus on deeply affordable permanent housing is KEY to ending homelessness. 
 
The proposed Supportive Housing Special Fund is particularly vital. It provides a structured 
financial mechanism to integrate development, operations, and supportive services—ensuring 
that vulnerable populations receive not just shelter, but the assistance needed to maintain housing 
stability. By centralizing funding and coordination under the Hawai'i Housing Finance and 
Development Corporation (HHFDC), the system would become more transparent and efficient, 
benefiting developers, service providers, and, most importantly, individuals in need. 
 
Addressing chronically homeless individuals and those with special housing needs—such as 
veterans, persons with addictions, aging-out foster youth, domestic violence survivors, and frail 
elders—is a moral and financial imperative. Without supportive housing, many of these 
individuals may face institutionalization, costly emergency interventions, or even premature 
death, as tragically exemplified by the recent case of a medically fragile kupuna.  CCH was 
assisting a kupuna living on the streets who died a week before we obtained an emergency 
voucher to provide housing.  This bill could have saved her life. 
 
Catholic Charities Hawai`i urges your support for this bill.   Both the Kauhale and the Supportive 
Housing Initiatives are needed to address this huge issue.  Please approve significant funding that 
will bring hope to persons who need ongoing supportive services to remain in our communities. 
 
If you have any questions, please contact our Legislative Liaison, Betty Lou Larson, at (808) 
527-4813.  

 
 
  
Date: February 10, 2025 
COMMITTEE ON HOUSING 
Rep. Luke A. Evslin, Chair 
Rep. Tyson K. Miyake, Vice Chair 
 
NOTICE OF HEARING 
Date: Wednesday, February 12, 2025 
TIME:  9:00 AM 
 
 
 
 
Position: SUPPORT HB431 
 
Aloha Chair Luke Evslin, Vice Chair Rep.Tyson Miyake and committee members: 
 
The DPH Kupuna Caucus supports bill HB431 regarding the Kauhale Initiative to 
house the houseless.  It is shameful that Hawaii has the highest per capita incidence of 
homelessness.  This type of housing is what we have been seeking on our Island of Kauai 
for many years.   
The Kūpuna Caucus of the Democratic Party of Hawaiʻi has more than 2,000 enrolled 
members who are politically active and greatly interested in all issues affecting seniors in 
the State of Hawaiʻi and nationally.   
We have many houseless kupuna and working families needing safe and affordable housing.  
This is not a lifestyle that they want or choose. There may be some that may prefer to live 
outdoors but conditions are harsh and not suited for elderly or sick individuals. I have 
supported Josh Green for Governor based on his promise of Kauhale Villages on ALL 
Islands.  
Please give this bill your utmost attention and SUPPORT.  It is vital for the overall 
wellbeing of our community.   
Thank you very much for the opportunity to testify on this bill. 
                                            
                                            Barbara Penn 
                                            on behalf of the 
 
 
        Kūpuna Caucus of the Democratic Party of Hawaiʻi 
 
 
        bpenn200@outlook.com 808-652-9478 
_ 

 
 
  
 
 

 
 
TO: ​
Honorable Rep. Luke A. Evslin​
Chair, House Committee on Housing 
 
Honorable Rep. Tyson K. Miyake​
Vice Chair, House Committee on Housing 
FROM: ​
Angie Knight, Community Relations Manager​
IHS, Institute for Human Services, Inc. 
RE: ​
​
HB 431 HD1 - Relating to Housing 
DATE: ​
February 10, 2025 
POSITION: ​
IHS supports the passing of HB 431 HD1 
 
IHS, The Institute for Human Services, supports the passing of HB431. Since it began in 2016, 
the Kauhale Initiative has been able to establish temporary housing and shelter for a wide range 
of individuals experiencing homelessness. The flexibility of the initiative means that as a 
continuum of providers, we can hone in on specific populations and address specialized needs, 
helping more individuals get into shelter and off the streets and further on their path to 
permanent housing, such as formerly homeless families, those in substance use recovery, 
reentry following incarceration, and more. 
 
Expanding the budget for the Kauhale Initiative allows current providers' operating sites to have 
stability for programs to help individuals within their care and more in the coming years. 
Moreover, it allows the creation of new sites with different focus populations. Moreover, creating 
a special fund to promote the development of permanent supportive housing addresses one of 
our community’s current bottlenecks: individuals ready for permanent housing but with few 
options for the supportive services they need at their often fixed income rate. 
 
Mahalo, thank you for the opportunity to testify and support the passing of this critical legislation 
to fund part of our homeless service’s continuum of care.  
 

 
 
 
Senate Committee on Housing  
 
Hearing: Wednesday, February 12th, 2025 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF HB431: RELATING TO HOUSING. 
 
The Hawaii State Youth Commission (HiYC) was established to “advise the governor and 
legislature on the effects of legislative policies, needs, assessments, priorities, programs, and 
budgets concerning the youth of the state.” We are writing in support of HB431. 
 
The youth of today are faced with the issue of affordable housing. It has been known for a while 
that the state of Hawaiʻi has one of the highest costs of living in the country. As this problem only 
grows in size, so does our worry for the fates of our youths in the state, as we are the upcoming 
generation that will be entering the workforce and will soon be looking for homes of our own.     
 
This is why it is concerning to us, as youth, that our state does not have enough legislation and 
social programs in place to help the people who are already, or at risk of being, houseless in the 
state. Social programs like the Kauhale project are meant to act as a safety net for our people in 
times of great need, acting as a community that gathers together to build better foundations.  
 
We believe that the housing crisis is a generational matter. Therefore, if nothing is done about 
this quickly, it will disproportionately impact the upcoming generation of youths, who will need all 
the support we can get. It is the government's responsibility to protect and serve the people of 
Hawaiʻi, especially our youth. For this reason, we urge the Committee to pass this bill, and we 
believe that this can be a great benefit to the at-risk youth of the state.     
 
Thank you for your consideration of our testimony in support of this important bill, 
 
The Hawaiʻi State Youth Commission. 
 
hawaiistateyc@gmail.com 
 
 

 
 
TO:  
House Committee on Housing 
Representative Luke A. Evslin, Chair 
Representative Tyson K. Miyake, Vice Chair; and 
Members of the Committee 
 
FROM:  Micah Kāne, Chief Executive Officer & President 
 
RE: Testimony in Support for HB 431 HD 1 Relating to Housing 
Date: Wednesday, February 12, 2025 at 9:00am 
Place: Hearing Room 430 
 
 
The Hawaiʻi Community FoundaƟon (HCF) supports HB 431 HD 1, which continues to fund and support 
the Kauhale Iniative to provide creative solutions to combat homelessness. In addition, the bill bolsters 
the state’s efforts to create safe supportive housing options for the community.  
 
HCF’s CHANGE Framework identifies six essential sectors for commitment to create a better Hawai‘i. The 
goals of HB 431 HD 1 fit within both the “C” sector for Community-Centered Economy and “H” sector for 
Health and Wellness. 
 
Hawaiʻi faces one of the highest homelessness levels of any state, currently experiencing a rate of more 
than 40 houseless residents per 10,000 individuals. The high cost of living, relative low wages, and 
limited housing supply create a challenging environment that push many individuals and families to 
make difficult choices about how to spend their limited resources. Just one financial setback can be the 
difference between skipping a meal, forgoing desperately needed medicine, or missing a rental 
payment. For anyone that loses the security of their own home, it is imperative to find a new, stable 
shelter as quickly as possible. 
 
The Kauhale Initiative is just the type of solution that Hawaiʻi needs. It promotes cost-effective shared 
spaces, that allow residents to take ownership and responsibility for the physical place and each other. 
By expanding this program, the state can provide a greater safety net for the most vulnerable 
population. Furthermore, the supportive housing programs facilitate care and treatment opportunities 
for individuals with disabilities, those dealing with mental health illnesses, others battling substance 
abuse, and more. These services are critical to facilitate healing and stability.  
 
HCF supports the Kauhale Initiative because it has already demonstrated success. By appropriating 
additional funds, the state can continue its efforts to reduce homelessness and demonstrate the care 
and compassion that is appropriate when assisting people that are facing these tremendous challenges.   
 
Thank you for considering HCF’s testimony in support of HB 431 HD 1. Homelessness is a critical issue for 
all of Hawaiʻi and the potential benefits of these sensible programs will be felt far and wide. 
 

 
 
 
 
Testimony of the Hawai‘i Appleseed Center for Law and Economic Justice 
Support for HB431 HD1 - Relating to Housing 
House Committee on Housing 
Wednesday, February 12, 2025 at 9:00AM Conf. Rm. 430 and via Videoconference 
 
Mahalo for the opportunity to testify in strong support of HB431 HD1, which would establish 
and appropriate funds into the Supportive Housing Special Fund and appropriate funds for the 
state's Kahaule initiative. This bill represents a critical step toward reducing chronic 
homelessness, promoting public health, and enhancing social stability 
Hawai‘i has one of the highest per capita homelessness rates in the nation, with the 2024 
Point-in-Time Count reporting 6,389 individuals experiencing homelessness statewide. 
There is an urgent need to support our unsheltered community. 
HB431 HD1 recognizes that housing is the solution to houselessness. The Kauhale Initiative 
facilitates the rapid development of transitional and bridge housing options to help people move 
off the streets into stable shelter. By appropriating funds for this initiative, HB431 HD1 enables 
the state to continue providing flexible, community-driven housing models that address 
short-term housing needs.  
While these temporary solutions are essential, permanent deeply affordable housing remains 
key to ending homelessness. The state will be able to provide such units through the 
establishment and appropriations of the Supportive Housing Special Fund under HHFDC to 
fund three critical components: 
1.​ Cost of development of supportive housing units. 
2.​ Cost of operations and maintenance, including rental assistance. 
3.​ Cost of provision of supportive services. 
The SHSP will improve coordination between housing development, rental assistance, and 
support services to create an effective and transparent system for service providers, developers, 
and vulnerable populations. These target populations include homeless individuals, domestic 
violence victims, kupuna, disabled persons, youth, veterans, and other groups with acute needs. 
The SHSF will facilitate the development of mixed-income rental housing projects with 
dedicated units for supportive housing. By integrating supportive units into broader housing 
developments, HHFDC will be able to ensure fiscal viability. Mixed-income rental housing also 
allows these individuals to live alongside diverse populations, which is critical to supporting 
long-term stability. With the addition of funds being able to be used for rental assistance, the 
SHSF enables deep affordability for individuals who would otherwise not be able to afford 
shelter.  

 
 
 
 
Testimony of the Hawai‘i Appleseed Center for Law and Economic Justice 
Support for HB431 HD1 - Relating to Housing 
House Committee on Housing 
Wednesday, February 12, 2025 at 9:00AM Conf. Rm. 430 and via Videoconference 
 
Supportive housing programs have placed hundreds of homeless families and those at risk into 
safe housing. The supportive, wraparound services include essential services such as case 
management, counseling, and employment support to help tenants overcome barriers to 
permanent housing and independence.  
Studies consistently show that when individuals gain access to stable housing, they are more 
likely to voluntarily engage in substance use disorder treatment, mental health services, and 
other economic mobility opportunities. Housing First programs nationwide report that 50-60% of 
residents participate in substance abuse treatment when services are provided, demonstrating 
the critical role of supportive housing in promoting self-sufficiency and well-being. 
Stable housing leads to better health outcomes and reduces reliance on emergency services, 
while fostering community well-being and public safety. Continued state investment in 
housing-first solutions is essential for building a resilient, inclusive, and healthy Hawai‘i. We urge 
the committee to pass HB431 HD1. 
Mahalo for the opportunity to testify. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
To advance and promote a healthy economic environment 
for business, advocating for a responsive government and 
quality education, while preserving Maui’s unique community 
characteristics. 
 
HEARING BEFORE THE HOUSE COMMITTEE ON HOUSING 
HAWAII STATE CAPITOL, HOUSE CONFERENCE ROOM 430 
Friday, February 7, 2025 AT 9:00 A.M. 
  
To The Honorable Representative Luke A. Evslin, Chair 
The Honorable Representative Tyson K. Miyake, Vice Chair 
Members of the Committee on Housing 
 
SUPPORT HB431 HD1 RELATING TO HOUSING 
  
The Maui Chamber of Commerce SUPPORTS HB431 HD1 which appropriates funds for the Kauhale 
Initiative; and establishes and appropriates funds into and out of the Supportive Housing Special Fund. 
 
The Chamber recognizes that Hawaii has the highest homelessness rate per capita in the nation. The 
2024 Point In Time Count reported a total of 6,389 individuals experiencing homelessness in the State. 
The majority are on Oahu, with 4,494, followed by Hawaii (718), Maui (654), and Kauai (523). 
 
As we have stated previously, housing remains a critical need across the state, and particularly in Maui 
County. We are excited about the Kauhale Initiative and are encouraged to see a number of these 
communities beginning to take shape throughout the state. 
 
Addressing the housing crisis and rising rents requires a combination of solutions, and we are hopeful 
that more Kauhale will be developed on Maui. 
 
For these reasons, the Maui Chamber of Commerce fully supports HB431 HD1 and respectfully urges 
its passage. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Pamela Tumpap 
President 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

AK PACIFIC HOUSING
ASS|$TANCE CQRPQRAT|QN
888 lwilei Road, Suite 200
Honolulu, Hawaii 968I7
In Support of HB43l HD1
Hawaii Rep. Luke A. Evslin, Housing Committee Chair
Hawaii Rep. Tyson K. Miyake, Housing Vice Chair
Members of the Housing Committee
Paciﬁc Housing Assistance Corporation, a Hawaii-based nonproﬁt, develops and manages affordable
housing for very low—to moderate-income families, seniors, and individuals with special needs.
Over the past 44 years, we’ve collaborated with nonprofit service providers to construct, acquire, or
renovate 3l projects, offering 338 permanent supportive housing units for very low-income
individuals with physical, intellectual, developmental, and severe mental disabilities and other
special needs populations.
We strongly support HB43l HD1, which seeks to continue implementing the Kauhale initiative,
establish the supportive housing special fund, and allocate critical funding to address the increasing
needs of Hawaii’s homeless and special needs population.
There is a critical need for affordable rental housing that combines supportive services and rental
assistance to promote stability, health, and independence for veterans, formerly incarcerated
individuals, domestic violence survivors, people with disabilities, youth aging out of foster care, and
others.
This legislation enhances Hawaii Housing Finance and Development Corporation’s ability to
collaborate with developers to create supportive housing units for stand-alone or mixed-income
rental projects. The ﬂexible funding provided through HB43l HD1 will play a key role in supporting
development, operational costs, and delivering essential supportive services across the state.
The bill’s emphasis on partnerships among government agencies, non-profit organizations, and
private sector stakeholders aligns with PHAC’s mission to promote sustainable housing solutions.
Supportive housing is more thanjust a response to housing challenges. lt is a foundation for building
strong, inclusive communities where individuals can thrive.
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of HB43l HD1. We appreciate your
commitment to ensure Hawaii continues to build on the progress made through the Kauhale initiative
and to address the critical housing needs of our most vulnerable residents.
Sin
y,
l
Au rey E. Awaya
Executive Director
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

TO: Rep Luke A. Evslin, Chair, Rep. Tyson K. Miyake, Vice Chair 
 
FROM: Donna Miller 
 
SUBJECT: HB431 Relating to Housing  
 
I want to voice support for HB431 with comments. 
HB431 appropriates funds for the Kauhale Initiative. Establishes and appropriates funds into and 
out of the Supportive Housing Special Fund. Establishes the Kauhale Initiative Special Fund.  
  
My sister is 53 years old, diagnosed with intellectually disability and autism. She is a waiver 
participant. I have been working with her case manager to find housing (domiciliary homes, 
adult foster homes, etc.) with the proper level of care for her. It has been a challenge to find the 
right home for her. There is a shortage of available homes for many reasons: 
 
Caregivers are advancing in age and retiring.  
Caregivers are not getting needed supportive assistance (PAB Workers) 
The raise in minimum wage makes it more challenging to hire workers. 
 
There are not enough homes available to support the adult IDD population.  
 
Due to the shortage of homes, our I/DD population is getting stuck in hospitals and the one crisis 
shelter on Oahu for an extended amount of time causing strain on these resources. This is causing 
extending hardship on this vulnerable population that need placement to function at their optimal 
level. Our I/DD population already has hardships and not having a suitable living arrangement 
makes their challenges even more difficult. 
 
I urge you to pass this bill to ensure that the needs of individuals with I/DD are prioritized first in 
Hawai‘i’s housing solutions. Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of 
HB431. 
 
Donna Miller 
Kailua Resident 
 
 

HB-431-HD-1 
Submitted on: 2/9/2025 9:30:47 AM 
Testimony for HSG on 2/12/2025 9:00:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
David Ball 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
To the members of the Committee, 
I write in strong support of this measure to strengthen our provision of needed shelter and 
services to our houseless population. Our society and government are only as strong as our 
support for our most vulnerable citizens. Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Sincerely yours, 
David Ball, Waialae-Kahala 
 

HB-431-HD-1 
Submitted on: 2/10/2025 8:40:42 AM 
Testimony for HSG on 2/12/2025 9:00:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Kaili Swan 
Individual 
Support 
Remotely Via 
Zoom 
 
 
Comments:  
I am strong support of the measure beacuse people with disabilities need affordable housing to 
live independently on their own or with their parents or caregivers without living on street in the 
communities please pass this bill thank you. 
 

 
Wednesday, February 12, 2025  
State Rep. Luke Evslin, Chair, House Committee on Housing 
Members of the House Committee on Housing 
 
Testimony in support of H.B. 431, H.D. 1, Relating to Supported Housing 
 
Thank you for this opportunity to provide written testimony on H.B. 431, H.D. 1. My 
name is Sandra Oshiro, and I coordinate the Hawaii Young Adults in Transition, a support group 
for individuals on the autism spectrum and their families. 
 
 
H.B. 431 seeks to serve populations in the state who are homeless or in danger of 
homelessness. Among them are those with intellectual or developmental disabilities, including 
individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) such as my daughter. ASD is a growing health 
issue and a lifelong disability. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates 
that it now affects 1 in 36 people. 
Many adults on the autism spectrum have difficulty finding employment and housing 
because of intellectual, communication, and mental health challenges. Without the support of 
family members, including aging parents who will soon be unable to care for them, individuals 
with ASD can find themselves living on the streets. 
 
By funding supportive housing, this bill helps ensure individuals with disabilities receive 
not just shelter, but also essential wraparound services such as case management, job training, 
and healthcare access. Current affordable housing programs, while important, often lack 
accommodations that serve the needs of people with IDD. The bill would ensure funding is 
available to create and sustain housing with built-in supports. Given stable, supported housing, 
individuals with IDD can contribute to their communities through employment, volunteerism, 
and civic engagement. 
The bill’s flexibility in funding mixed-income rental projects helps ensure that IDD 
individuals are integrated into the community rather than segregated in siloed housing. The 
proposal aligns with federal priorities such as the Olmstead decision, which mandates 
community-based living for individuals with disabilities whenever appropriate. 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

States that have invested in supportive housing for IDD populations have seen long-term 
success in reducing homelessness and improving individuals’ quality of life. We urge you to 
support H.B. 431 as a necessary step toward ensuring stable, inclusive, and sustainable housing 
for people who are among the most vulnerable in our communities. 
 
Thank you, 
Sandra Oshiro 
ssoshiro@gmail.com 
