JOSH GREEN, M.D.
  GOVERNOR
STATE OF HAWAI`I
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
KA ‘OIHANA HO‘ONA‘AUAO
P.O. BOX 2360
HONOLULU, HAWAI`I 96804
KEITH T. HAYASHI
SUPERINTENDENT
 Date: 03/31/2025
Time: 10:01 AM
Location: CR 211 & Videoconference
Committee: Senate Ways and Means
Department:
Education
Person Testifying: Keith T. Hayashi, Superintendent of Education
Bill Title:
HB 0400, HD1, SD1  RELATING TO THE JUDICIARY.
Purpose of Bill:
Appropriates funds for the Judiciary for the fiscal biennium beginning 7/1/2025, 
and ending 6/30/2027. Effective 4/23/2057. (SD1)
Department's Position:
The  Hawai'i State Department of Education (Department) supports HB 0400, HD1, SD1, which 
appropriates funds for the Judiciary for the fiscal biennium. The Department values its partnership 
with the District Family Court of the First Circuit in implementing its Early Elementary Intervention 
Program, which provides targeted support to families and schools to improve attendance and reduce 
chronic absenteeism among elementary students on Oahu.  Collaboration between the Department 
and the Judiciary is essential to addressing student attendance challenges and ensuring early 
intervention.
These efforts help keep students engaged in their education and establish a foundation for long-term 
academic success. Continued funding will enable the District Family Court of the First Circuit to 
expand outreach, enhance support services, and equip schools with effective resources to address 
attendance barriers.
The Department appreciates the District Family Court of the First Circuit's ongoing commitment to 
Hawaii’s students and families.  
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on this measure.
WRITTEN ONLY

 
 
 
 
 
The Judiciary, State of Hawai‘i 
 
Testimony to the Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 Regular Session 
 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
Senator Donovan M. Dela Cruz, Chair 
Senator Sharon Y. Moriwaki, Vice Chair 
 
Monday, March 31, 2025, 10:01 a.m. 
State Capitol, Conference Room 211 
 
By 
 
Robert D. S. Kim 
Chief Court Administrator 
Third Circuit Court 
 
WRITTEN TESTIMONY ONLY 
 
 
Bill No. and Title: House Bill No. 400, H.D.1, S.D.1, Relating to the Judiciary. 
 
Purpose: Appropriates funds for the Judiciary for the fiscal biennium beginning 7/1/2025, and 
ending 6/30/2027. Effective 4/23/2057. (SD1) 
 
Judiciary's Position:  
On behalf of the Third Circuit, I am writing to respectfully request your support for House 
Bill 400, H.D.1, S.D.1,  also known as the Judiciary Appropriations Act of 2025. This bill would 
appropriate funds for two critical budget requests for the Third Circuit: design funds for a new 
South Kohala district court facility and funding for a second district court judge in Kona. 
The Capital Improvement Project Request (“CIP”) for plans and a design for a new South 
Kohala District Courthouse is included in this bill in accordance with House Concurrent 
Resolution No. 88, Regular Session of 2023, which requested that the Judiciary prepare a master 
development plan and submit a CIP for an upgraded South Kohala District Court. This CIP will 
address critical deficiencies in the existing courthouse, meet the current and future needs of the 
North Hawaiʻi community, and ensure that the Judiciary is able to carry out its mission to deliver 
justice in an efficient and accessible manner. 

House Bill No. 400, H.D. 1, S.D.1, Relating to the Judiciary 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
 
Monday, March 31, 2025 
 
Page 2  
 
 
 
The current South Kohala District Court building was constructed in 1982. According to 
2020 census data, the population of the North and South Kohala Districts served by the existing 
facility has increased by 230% since 1980. This population growth has driven a significant rise in 
case volume, with the court now handling between 9,000 and 10,000 cases annually. Despite this 
heavy caseload, the current courthouse is only 3,000 square feet, with one courtroom, minimal 
office space, and no meeting rooms or waiting areas. Its size and design are severely inadequate, 
and often up to 50 individuals are forced to wait for their court hearings in their vehicles or outside 
in uncovered areas, exposed to the elements. The facility is also not ADA compliant, leading to 
hardships for disabled individuals—particularly with respect to restroom access.    
Security is a paramount concern. The existing facility lacks separate entrances for judges 
and court staff, as well as secure, separate waiting areas for opposing parties in sensitive cases, 
such as temporary restraining orders (“TROs”). This creates the potential for dangerous 
interactions. Because there are no holdings areas in the courthouse, in-custody defendants must 
remain in the jail van until their case is called, forcing defense attorneys to meet their clients in the 
van. 
The new South Kohala District Court facility will comprehensively address the many 
deficiencies of the existing courthouse. It will be constructed on the Waimea Civic Center 
grounds—the same state-owned parcel where the current facility is located—which will eliminate 
additional land acquisition costs. It will feature expanded office space, secure holding areas, 
separate waiting areas for opposing parties, and ADA-compliant restrooms. Client services, which 
are currently located off-site, will be integrated into the facility, and modern infrastructure and 
energy-efficient systems will ensure sustainable operations. Importantly, the existing courthouse 
will remain operational throughout construction, ensuring uninterrupted services.  
 
In addition to this CIP request, the appropriations for the Third Circuit’s operating budget 
in this bill includes funding for a second district court judge in Kona, as well as support staff. This 
funding request arises from a critical and urgent need to address the severe strain on the Kona 
District Court, where a single judge currently bears the immense responsibility of handling nearly 
16,000 individual cases annually. This unsustainable situation jeopardizes the Judiciary’s ability 
to fulfill its core mission to administer justice in an impartial, efficient, and accessible manner. 
The population of the districts served by this court has nearly tripled since the first Kona 
District Court Judge was sworn in nearly 40 years ago. Judicial resources have not kept pace with 
this explosive growth, and despite the increase in population, the Kona District Court continues to 
rely on a single judge. This has created untenable caseloads that overwhelm court operations and 
hinder the court’s ability to effectively serve the public.  
For example, traffic court calendars routinely exceed 70 individual defendants in a single 
morning, and litigants are frequently obliged to wait hours—sometimes over lunch and into the 
afternoon—for their cases to be heard. Court sessions often run from 8:30 a.m. until the close of 
business without a substantial break for the judge or court staff. District Court staff often must 

House Bill No. 400, H.D. 1, S.D.1, Relating to the Judiciary 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
 
Monday, March 31, 2025 
 
Page 3  
 
 
 
alternate lunch breaks to keep hearings running uninterrupted, and attorneys, public defenders, 
prosecutors, and litigants are also subjected to these grueling schedules, which take a toll on their 
health, morale, and efficiency. Resulting delays in hearings and case resolutions have undermined 
trust in the judicial system and can create significant personal and financial hardships for victims, 
witnesses, and litigants. This relentless pace also compromises the judge’s ability to address other 
critical judicial duties, such as reviewing search warrants, making judicial determinations of 
probable cause, and, most concerningly, processing applications for TROs.  
The cascade of inefficiencies that follows from a lack of sufficient judicial resources 
undermines the quality of justice delivered by the Kona District Court. One judge, no matter how 
dedicated, cannot sustainably balance the competing demands of timeliness and thoroughness 
under the current circumstances. The immense pressure on staff, attorneys, and litigants is 
demoralizing, leads to burnout, and diminishes the public’s confidence in the Judiciary. 
The addition of a second District Court Judge in Kona is the only viable solution to this 
urgent crisis. The Judiciary has sponsored pending legislation that would establish one additional 
district court judge position in the Third Circuit (H.B. 401, H.D.1, S.D.1 and S.B. 267) 
concurrently with this appropriations bill. Moreover, as there is currently a vacant District Court 
courtroom at the Keahuolū Courthouse, the addition of a second District Court Judge will not 
require any additional capital improvement costs. A second judge would not only reduce individual 
caseloads, but also allow the court to operate more efficiently, dispose of cases more promptly, 
and provide litigants and victims with the timely and equitable justice they deserve.  
I respectfully ask for your consideration and support in approving the Judiciary 
Appropriations Act of 2025 that includes these critical appropriations for the Third Circuit. Thank 
you for your commitment to strengthening our judicial system and addressing the pressing needs 
of the Third Circuit and our Hawaiʻi Island community, and thank you for the opportunity to offer 
testimony on this important bill. 
 

 
 
South Kohala District Court Photos 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Left: Depicts the only waiting area for the public, which is located outside. Individuals who cannot fit on the covered lanai must wait 
in uncovered areas or in their vehicles. 
Center: Shows the foyer just past security. The clerk’s window is on the left, the restroom entrance is to the right, and the courtroom 
door is in the center of the photo. 
Right: View of the foyer through the clerk’s window. 

 
 
 
South Kohala District Court Photos 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Photos: Depicting cramped staff working areas in current facility. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
South Kohala District Court Photos 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Photos: Showing the inadequate multipurpose room that currently serves as the employee breakroom, copy and workroom, IT and 
server room, and storage.  
 

 
 
 
 
The Judiciary, State of Hawai‘i  
Testimony to the Thirty-Third State Legislature 
2025 Regular Session 
 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
Senator Donovan Dela Cruz, Chair 
Senator Sharon Moriwaki, Vice Chair 
 
Monday, March 31, 2025, 10:01 a.m. 
State Capitol, Conference Room 211 and Videoconference 
 
by: 
 
Brandon M. Kimura 
Policy and Planning Department Director 
 
WRITTEN TESTIMONY ONLY 
 
 
 
Bill No. and Title: House Bill No. 400, House Draft 1, Senate Draft 1, Relating to the Judiciary. 
Purpose: Appropriates funds for the Judiciary for the 2025–2027 biennium. 
Judiciary’s Position: 
The Judiciary strongly supports House Bill No. 400, House Draft 1, Senate Draft 1, which 
reflects the Judiciary’s resource requirements for Fiscal Biennium 2025–2027. 
Based on current circumstances and projected resource needs for the future, the Judiciary 
requests additional operating resources in the amount of 17.0 permanent FTE and 1.0 temporary 
FTE, and $6.17M in FY 2026, and $6.25M in FY 2027. This is an addition of approximately 3% 
to the Judiciary’s operating budget. The Judiciary remains vigilant during this period of uncertainty 
over federal funding and the possible impact on the State and Judiciary budgets and operations. 
We have assessed federally-funded grant projects of the Judiciary and are committed to ongoing 
communication with the Legislature and with local non-governmental partners of the Judiciary 
who rely on federal funding. 

House Bill No. 400, House Draft 1, Senate Draft 1, Relating to the Judiciary 
 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
 
Monday, March 31, 2025 
 
Page 2  
 
 
The Judiciary also requests a total of $11.9M in bond funds for capital improvement 
projects in FY 2026. This amount in bond funds, reflected in the current House Draft 1, Senate 
Draft 1, includes a request for $2M more in lump sum than the measure as introduced. This is 
because the Judiciary received new information that the relocation of the Children’s Justice Center 
on O‘ahu will require at least $2M more than previously appropriated. These circumstances are 
detailed further below, and the Judiciary appreciates the Senate Committee on Judiciary for 
considering this and including it in the current version. 
The Judiciary supports the Senate Committee on Judiciary’s addition of funds in JUD601 
for civil legal services and immigration-related proceedings while respectfully requesting that any 
appropriations in these areas not supplant the Judiciary’s existing funding nor current budget 
requests. 
Operating Requests: 
Operating resource requests center around funding to make permanent or expand three 
Specialty Courts on O‘ahu, to fully staff the new Wahiawā District Court that will open during this 
biennium, an additional District Court Judge and support staff in Kona, cybersecurity and critical 
technology costs, funding for the Criminal Justice Research Institute (CJRI), and restoration of 
funding for essential staffing that was defunded during the early part of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
As for positions, nine of the 18 (17.0 permanent and 1.0 temporary) are requested to 
continue current staffing. This is because seven temporary positions for the Women’s Court Pilot 
Project, along with one permanent position and one temporary position for the CJRI, will expire, 
but there are compelling reasons to continue these programs and the necessary staffing. The 
remaining requested positions will significantly expand capacity to certain operations. 
Brief details of each request are provided below: 
Women’s Court – The Women’s Court Pilot Project was established by the Legislature in 
July of 2022 (Act 243/22) with funding for a three-year pilot that included seven temporary 
positions, which are set to expire at the end of FY 2025. The request of $705,416 in FY 2026 and 
$705,416 in FY 2027, and 8.0 FTE permanent positions will establish a permanent Women’s 
Court. The Women’s Court, also known as Mohala Wahine, was created to address the rapid 
growth in the incarceration of women in the United States by providing comprehensive court-
supervised treatment, opportunities, and resources as an alternative to incarceration for women in 
the criminal justice system who have suffered trauma, abuse, poverty, mental illness, substance 
use disorders, and/or unhealthy relationships. The goal of the program is for the participants to 
identify and address issues, to prevent re-entry into criminality, and to aid the participants in 
bettering their economic conditions and life circumstances. Given the need for the program, a 
strong start as a three-year pilot created by the Legislature, and that the program (and positions 
and funding) will expire at the end of FY 2025, the Judiciary requests funding and eight positions 
(a net increase of one), including one substance use counselor. 

House Bill No. 400, House Draft 1, Senate Draft 1, Relating to the Judiciary 
 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
 
Monday, March 31, 2025 
 
Page 3  
 
 
Truancy Court and Early Education Intervention Program (EEIP) – The Judiciary requests 
funding of $188,388 in FY 2026 and $183,288 in FY 2027 to restore funding for three redescribed 
Social Worker positions and additional expenses to significantly expand the Truancy Court and 
EEIP on O‘ahu. Truancy Court and EEIP are designed to identify and address, where possible, the 
difficulties underlying chronic school truancy. The focus of Truancy Court is diversion from the 
formal court process. The bulk of the preventative work is done on the front-end to stop truancy 
petitions from being filed in court by addressing barriers to school attendance. To accomplish this, 
Persons in Need of Supervision (PINS) Social Workers visit campuses weekly to meet with 
students identified as having attendance issues. 
Driving While Impaired (DWI) Court Program – The Judiciary requests funding of 
$232,412 in FY 2026 and $237,612 in FY 2027 for two positions that will be redescribed to be a 
Social Worker IV and Specialty Court Coordinator, and additional expenses, to make the DWI 
Court Program permanent. The DWI Court Program was established in April 2012 and has been 
operational since January 2013, with initial federal funding for the program from the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) through a grant administered by the State 
Department of Transportation. The DWI Court Program confronts the persistent problem of 
impaired driving and seeks to reduce recidivism among repeat and high-risk offenders by 
addressing the underlying cause of impaired driving, which is alcohol and/or substance use 
disorder. Without intervention, this population of chronically impaired drivers might continue to 
reoffend and endanger public safety on our roadways. Securing permanent funding would allow 
the DWI Court Program to continue, grow, and provide accountability and monitoring of the 
treatment and recovery process for repeat and high-risk offenders. 
Wahiawā District Court – There are five requests related to the Wahiawā District Court, 
which will open to the public in Spring 2026. The first relates to restoring funding for three 
positions in the amount of $192,408 in FY 2026 and $192,408 in FY 2027 to transition to a full 
complement of adult client services to the new Wahiawā District Court to support case 
management of probation cases. The planned Adult Client Services Branch (ACSB) Wahiawā 
District Court Unit will play a critical role in bringing court services to the community. When the 
ACSB Wahiawā District Court Unit is operational, it will service an estimated 200 to 300 cases 
based on the current clients that reside in the designated geographic areas: Waimea, Mililani, 
Kunia, Whitmore Village, Waialua, Hale‘iwa, and Sunset. 
The second request for Wahiawā District Court is for funding of $27,084 in FY 2026 (six 
months’ salary only) and $54,168 in FY 2027, and 1.0 FTE permanent position for a Janitor II. 
The existing Wahiawā District Courthouse is in a rental space and janitorial services are covered 
by the lease. This position is necessary to support cleaning levels for the types of uses in the new 
facility. For instance, the existing facility does not include a probation unit which performs drug 
testing and will require additional cleaning.  This position is requested to provide the level of 
cleaning required to provide a clean and healthy environment for all who enter and use the facility. 
The third request for Wahiawā District Court is funding of $346,209 in FY 2026 and 
$486,967 in FY 2027 to provide contracted security personnel for patrol, primarily interior. The 

House Bill No. 400, House Draft 1, Senate Draft 1, Relating to the Judiciary 
 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
 
Monday, March 31, 2025 
 
Page 4  
 
 
new courthouse will have two courtrooms and expand its services to include Ho‘okele (court 
information services), civil case processing, and probation services. Courthouse security for the 
current location consists of two unarmed contracted private security personnel and one Deputy 
Sheriff under the District Court Sheriff Command. To meet best practices, the new Wahiawā 
District Court would need one sergeant and three Deputy Sheriffs assigned to patrol the new 
Wahiawā District Court. Contracted security services could provide an alternative, albeit less than 
optimal. Funding this request would support this critical safety function. 
The fourth request for Wahiawā District Court is to restore funding of $52,908 in FY 2026 
and $52,908 in FY 2027 for a position redescribed to an IT Tech III and dedicated to this facility. 
This IT Tech will provide support for courtroom video recording and video conferencing systems 
that enable litigants to participate in court hearings remotely. The new Wahiawā District Court 
will feature an additional courtroom, as well as an increased number of employees permanently 
based there.  Since the pandemic, the First Circuit has permitted most District Court litigants to 
opt for remote hearing appearances by Zoom. At some hearings, dozens of litigants do so. A 
functioning courtroom AV system is therefore critical to the core operations of the court. 
The fifth request for Wahiawā District Court is to restore funding of $317,448 in FY 2026 
and $317,448 in FY 2027 for four District Court Clerk II and two Bailiff II positions. These 
positions, based in Wahiawā, will also support ‘Ewa and Wai‘anae District Courts, thereby 
enhancing the services available at these three rural courts. These positions provide courtroom 
clerical coverage for District Court criminal, civil, and traffic proceedings, and associated court 
clerical duties to record and facilitate cases throughout the court system. Upon opening and staffing 
of the Wahiawā District Court, civil filings, Ho‘okele, and court hearings for these areas would be 
transferred there, from downtown Honolulu. A dedicated and permanent staff of District Court 
Clerks in Wahiawā would facilitate and streamline coverage for the ‘Ewa, Wai‘anae, and Wahiawā 
District Court civil calendars—Wahiawā would be the hub. Restoring the funding for these 
positions will allow the West and Central O‘ahu court users to expeditiously access and attend 
District Court business and enable the District Courts to facilitate and adjudicate cases in a more 
efficient manner. 
Kona District Court Judge – The Judiciary requests $368,943 in FY 2026 and $360,048 in 
FY 2027, and 4.0 FTE permanent positions, for an additional District Court Judge and three 
necessary support staff. The additional judgeship is needed to address the current extraordinary 
caseload in Kona, as well as the continuing increases in complexity of cases and the time required 
to schedule and hear cases on the court calendars, and to improve public service and safety. The 
Kona District Court is assigned to hear all District Court criminal, traffic, and civil matters for the 
divisions of North Kona, South Kona, and Ka‘ū. The first Kona District Court Judge was sworn in 
nearly forty years ago. Since then, the combined population of North and South Kona and Ka‘ū 
has more than doubled. The current caseload of the Kona District Court is nearly 16,000 cases 
annually, which are all currently being handled by one judge in one courtroom. This combination 
of factors has led to unsustainable court congestion and delays. 

House Bill No. 400, House Draft 1, Senate Draft 1, Relating to the Judiciary 
 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
 
Monday, March 31, 2025 
 
Page 5  
 
 
Cybersecurity and Technology – The Judiciary has three requests pertaining to 
cybersecurity and other technology.  
First, is a request for $1,175,300 in FY 2026 and $1,175,300 in FY 2027 to upgrade email 
subscriptions to improve security capabilities. The Judiciary currently uses Microsoft O365 for 
basic email with multifactor authentication and basic threat detection and protection. With 
government agencies and courts increasingly being targeted for cybersecurity attacks, this level of 
security is no longer sufficient. Upgrading from O365 basic email to M365 G5 email would 
significantly enhance the Judiciary’s cybersecurity posture. M365 G5 email—the same level of 
the State of Hawai‘i Executive Branch, which the Legislature funded during the 2024 Regular 
Session—includes robust cybersecurity features that address prevention, detection, investigation, 
and remediation of cybersecurity attacks on emails and Sharepoint data. 
The second cybersecurity-related request is for $458,224 in FYs 2026 and 2027 to restore 
funding for four positions that have since been redescribed to a modern need—a dedicated 
cybersecurity staff. In addition, this funding would allow for additional tools required to manage 
the Judiciary’s inventory of assets in an efficient and secure way. Specifically, this includes a suite 
that can create strong access control, maintain a current inventory and patch the assets, and 
maintain configuration baselines. 
The third technology-focused request is for $560,000 in FY 2026 and $420,000 in FY 2027 
to replace network switches in courthouses across the state that have reached their end-of-life. 
Network switches provide internet and phone connections to PCs, Cisco phones, printers, and 
courtroom devices. They were last replaced between 2016 and 2018; the average useful lifespan 
is between five to eight years. As network switches age, network connections become unreliable 
and eventually become inoperable. A significant number of Judiciary courthouse network switches 
have reached the end of their useful lifespan. 
Criminal Justice Research Institute (CJRI) – There are two requests related to the Criminal 
Justice Research Institute, established by Act 179 (SLH 2019). Both are to continue the resources 
appropriated in Act 147 (SLH 2023). More specifically, the first is $512,624 in FY 2026 and 
$577,058 in FY 2027, for a 1.0 FTE permanent Project Specialist position and software. Act 147 
(SLH 2023) appropriated funds for a permanent Project Specialist and software/technology costs 
for two years to begin to establish a centralized statewide criminal pretrial justice data reporting 
and collection system. Since then, CJRI has developed the foundation, including continuing to 
create a data warehouse and software tool that will modernize data sharing and create a centralized 
source of pretrial data. CJRI has obtained 15 years of pretrial data from the Department of Law 
Enforcement, the Department of Attorney General, and the Judiciary, and has partnered with these 
agencies to begin mapping data to draft data pipelines. Staff have been trained with software to 
ingest data into the data warehouse and established preliminary datasets for pretrial research. The 
Project Specialist position was created to support CJRI with in-house IT expertise. Although the 
position is permanent, funding ends on June 30, 2025. To build upon this firm foundation, continue 
work to establish a centralized statewide criminal pretrial justice data reporting and collection 

House Bill No. 400, House Draft 1, Senate Draft 1, Relating to the Judiciary 
 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
 
Monday, March 31, 2025 
 
Page 6  
 
 
system, as well as continue to assess data and be available to inform policymakers, CJRI requires 
that resources continue. 
The second CJRI-related request is to continue 1.0 FTE temporary Project Specialist and 
$71,016 in both years of the biennium. In addition to the permanent position with two-year funding 
described above, Act 147 (SLH 2023) authorized a temporary full-time Project Specialist position, 
also with two-year funding ending on June 30, 2025. This position ensures that the Judiciary can 
fully support CJRI’s technical needs with a position in the Judiciary’s IT department focused on 
the CJRI. As Judiciary data is ingested into the data warehouse, CJRI researchers need support 
from the Judiciary technical staff to ensure that the data is transformed into criminal pretrial data 
for meaningful use for research. 
Office of the Public Guardian (OPG) – The Judiciary requests $136,314 in FY 2026 and 
$125,424 in FY 2027, and 3.0 FTE permanent positions, for three Social Services Assistant IV 
positions and related equipment for the Office of the Public Guardian. The positions will assist the 
Third Circuit (Hawai‘i County) and First Circuit (City and County of Honolulu) guardians. OPG 
personnel are court-appointed to make informed decisions in the best interests of incapacitated 
individuals by safeguarding their rights, dignity, humanity, and quality of life. When OPG is 
appointed as guardian, it comes with a myriad of challenges associated with researching and 
untangling the ward’s unique situation. This work requires the guardians to work within many 
systems and gain familiarity with each ward. The additional positions will be assigned medium 
and low priority tasks that are necessary but are often deferred because of urgent or emergent 
circumstances for less stable wards. In addition, Social Services Assistants could improve safety 
when accompanying guardians in certain situations. Staff sometimes enter homes where other 
residents who are not under OPG’s care are unstable. Guardians have experienced threats of 
violence, dog bites, and other safety concerns. The Social Services Assistants would enable 
guardians to increase visits and care to all OPG wards. 
Risk Management Cost – The Judiciary requests $151,000 in FY 2026 and $151,000 in 
FY 2027 to cover an increase in the risk management costs owed to the Department of Accounting 
and General Services (DAGS). Pursuant to Comptroller Memoranda 1999-28 and 2007-05, and 
HRS § 41-D(4), DAGS bills the Judiciary annually for its share of the state’s risk management 
costs which include insurance policy premiums. DAGS notified the Judiciary that its share of the 
risk management costs would increase by approximately $151,000. 
Targeted Funding Restoration – The Judiciary’s next group of requests is to restore funding 
for selected defunded positions. During the early part of the pandemic, over $11 million was 
removed from the Judiciary’s budget for 192 vacant positions, to help the State’s economic crisis 
at that time. The Judiciary has continued to refine staffing statewide, including redescribing 
positions to modern needs and employing additional recruitment methods, particularly for 
positions where there have been recruiting difficulties. Nevertheless, these requests to restore 
funding are for positions critical to operations now and going forward. Specifically: 
(1) 
Courts of Appeal 

House Bill No. 400, House Draft 1, Senate Draft 1, Relating to the Judiciary 
 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
 
Monday, March 31, 2025 
 
Page 7  
 
 
Restored funding of $72,372 for FY 2026 and $72,372 in FY 2027 for a Judicial Assistant 
II at the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) would ensure necessary support to each judge of this 
Court. There are positions for six Associate Judges in the ICA and one Chief Judge. Each judge 
has a single Judicial Assistant II, and each position is imperative to the operations of the ICA. ICA 
Judicial Assistants use the Judiciary Information Management System (JIMS) and ICA internal 
database, assist with hiring and personnel matters, assist in compiling reports and statistics, assist 
in training of Law Clerks and Staff Attorneys, provide coverage as needed for other Judicial 
Assistants and Appellate Clerks, assist with screening of cases for conflicts of interest, and 
undertake numerous housekeeping and institutional tasks that maintain the high standard and spirit 
of aloha that is the hallmark of the ICA. 
(2) 
First Circuit  
Restored funding of $47,004 in FY 2026 and $47,004 in FY 2027 for one position 
redescribed to a Judicial Clerk III. The shift in court operations to many virtual hearings has 
benefitted court-users, but has strained staffing. This position, updated to a modern need, would 
host remote hearings, process calendars for various case types, obtain and review efiled documents 
in traffic and criminal cases, and more. Existing staff have covered these responsibilities, 
sometimes leading to delays or backlogs in other sections. This is unsustainable. 
Restored funding of $105,816 in FY 2026 and $105,816 in FY 2027 for two hybrid District 
Court Clerks IIs and Bailiffs. Two District Court Clerk positions will be redescribed to hybrid 
Clerks and Bailiffs to increase flexibility to address court needs. Specifically, these hybrid 
positions would increase the Honolulu District Court’s capacity to meet needs in courtrooms, 
including processing witness certification fees and implementing in-court processing, which 
would reduce delays in updating and processing the court record and delays in litigants’ ability to 
obtain case-related court dates. 
(3) 
Second Circuit 
The Judiciary requests restoration of a subtotal of $151,032 for both years of the biennium 
for a District Court Clerk in Lahaina, a District Court Clerk in Wailuku, and an Account Clerk. 
The District Court Clerk in Lahaina is responsible for the official court records in 
arraignment and trial proceedings. This position issues disposition slips to the public as they 
conclude their proceedings, ensures documents are submitted and conformed to statutory and 
procedural requirements, prepares warrants and orders pertaining to bail that may result in money 
being returned, and assists the public over the counter and over the telephone. This position is 
essential to rural courtroom services. 
The Wailuku District Court Clerk position is necessary to normalize staffing levels and 
improve service to the public. In this largest court facility in the county, inadequate staffing leads 
to delays and the inability to cover—as is often needed—rural courts that struggle with staffing. 

House Bill No. 400, House Draft 1, Senate Draft 1, Relating to the Judiciary 
 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
 
Monday, March 31, 2025 
 
Page 8  
 
 
The Account Clerk IV position provides critical support services to the Fiscal Office and 
the public. This includes creating purchase orders and processing invoices. While each position is 
responsible for a particular appropriation, the amount assigned to this defunded position has 
increased by over 25% since FY 2021. Since this position was defunded, the Second Circuit’s 
Fiscal Office assumed the responsibilities, thereby diverting focus from the Fiscal Office’s primary 
duties. 
(4) 
Third Circuit 
A key request in the Third Circuit is to restore $73,836 in FY 2026 and $73,836 in FY 2027 
for a Social Worker IV in the Kona Juvenile Client Services Branch. While this position was 
defunded early in the pandemic, Third Circuit decided to fill the position in March 2022 because 
the remaining two staff were overwhelmed by attempting to address all informal status offenses, 
law violators, and school nonattendance referrals. The Third Circuit used resources from funded 
vacancies, fewer jury trials, and other areas to fund and fill this position at that time. Due to 
increasing budget constraints, this is not sustainable without detrimental effects on other court 
operations. 
Next is a request to restore $57,192 in FY 2026 and $57,192 in FY 2027 for a Court 
Documents Clerk III in the Hilo Legal Documents Branch. This position, among other duties, 
assists with Circuit and Family Court filings. This includes addressing time-sensitive filings, such 
as Temporary Restraining Orders (TROs), and assisting self-represented litigants (SRLs) at the 
counter and over the phone. There has been a steady and significant increase in TROs filed in Hilo. 
Indeed, from 2019 to 2022, TRO filings in Hilo, particularly related to domestic abuse cases, have 
more than doubled the amount in Kona. 
The next request is to restore $47,004 in FY 2026 and $47,004 in FY 2027 for a Judicial 
Clerk III position in the Kona Traffic Violations Branch. This section supports one District Court 
Judge that hears cases from the North and South Kona and Ka‘ū Districts. The vacancy of this 
position has caused a backlog in creating citations in the Judiciary Information Management 
System (JIMS) and processing default judgments. Although some automation has made many 
tasks easier, automation in this unit has not offset added demands. The complexity of the legal 
process requires staff to articulate the information to self-represented litigants (SRLs) and process 
the work accurately and efficiently. 
Finally, the Third Circuit requests to restore $52,908 in FY 2026 and $52,908 in FY 2027 
for an IT Support Technician III in Hilo. Third Circuit’s limited IT support must cover a large land 
area and three facilities. Indeed, these responsibilities are so important that the Third Circuit 
redescribed a defunded position into this IT Support Technician III and filled the position, using 
internal funding from other areas available due to the COVID-19 pandemic leading to temporary 
shifts in operations. This is unsustainable without detrimental impacts to other operations. 
 

House Bill No. 400, House Draft 1, Senate Draft 1, Relating to the Judiciary 
 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
 
Monday, March 31, 2025 
 
Page 9  
 
 
(5) 
Administration 
Restored funding of $71,016 in FY 2026 and $71,016 in FY 2027 for a Purchasing and 
Specifications Specialist in the Judiciary’s Financial Services Department. This position is in a 
division that is responsible for a high volume of purchasing, procurement, and contracts. Among 
other things, this division annually processes over 1,000 purchase requisitions, nearly 900 
contracts, and approximately 12 Competitive Sealed Bids and 17 Competitive Purchase of Service 
and Competitive Sealed Proposals solicitations. 
Capital Improvement Requests: 
Capital Improvement Project (CIP) requirements continue to remain a major item of 
concern as the Judiciary’s infrastructure continues to age and deteriorate, and as the population 
served and services provided by the Judiciary continue to expand. We request CIP bond funds 
totaling $11.9 million for FY 2026 to address critical needs, some of which relate to the health and 
safety of Judiciary employees and the public.  
Specifically, the Judiciary is requesting $4.0 million to design a new South Kohala District 
Courthouse. The current South Kohala District Court carries significant concerns for safety, space, 
temperature, noise, and is quite simply inadequate to serve the community’s court-related needs. 
The Judiciary also requests $900,000 to replace an A/C chiller on Kaua‘i, at Pu‘uhonua Kaulike. 
The chiller is near the end of its lifecycle, and A/C manufacturing is experiencing hardships 
resulting in long lead times.  
The Judiciary also requests $7.0 million in lump sum bond funds to address both continuing 
and emerging building issues statewide. As stated above, this includes $2.0 million that will be 
directed to a shortfall in funding for relocation of the Children’s Justice Center on Oʻahu. The 
Legislature provided $6.0 million for that project in 2023. Since then, we have located a site and, 
along with DAGS, are proceeding. While the final amount remains uncertain, the latest estimate 
is that the project cost will exceed $8.0 million. Accordingly, we make this request for additional 
lump sum funds to maintain flexibility. 
The Judiciary respectfully requests your support of House Bill No. 400, House Draft 1, 
Senate Draft 1, the Judiciary’s biennium budget request with an effective date of July 1, 2025. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this measure. 

 
Makiki: 1020 South Beretania St., Honolulu, Hawai‘i  96814     Downtown: 1188 Bishop St., Ste 3209, Honolulu, HI 96813 
www.tlchawaii.org    (808) 777-7071    fax (808) 930-0969 
 
Statement Before The Committee on Ways and Means 
Monday, March 31, 2025 
10:01 AM 
Conference Room 211 & Videoconference 
 
in SUPPORT of 
HB400, HD1, SD1  - RELATING TO THE JUDICIARY 
 
Chair DELA CRUZ, Vice Chair MORIWAKI, and Members of the House Judiciary Committees 
 
The Legal Clinic (TLC) supports HB400, which appropriates funds for the Judiciary for the fiscal biennium 
beginning 7/1/2025, and ending 6/30/2027. 
 
TLC is a Hawai‘i nonprofit, nonpartisan organization. TLC is a direct legal services provider, representing 
those in Hawai‘i who meet income eligibility guidelines without regard to immigration status, national 
origin, ethnic background, race, religion, ideology, gender identity, sexual orientation, age, or disability. 
TLC works alongside immigrants so they can attain authorization to work and live with dignity, reunite 
with their families after years of separation and escape horrific violence to find refuge in the United States. 
TLC recognizes that every person needs and deserves to feel a sense of trust, welcome, and belonging. 
 
TLC is a current grantee under the Judiciary’s civil legal services fund. The Judiciary’s civil legal services 
fund is critical to supporting safety net providers in Hawaii. TLC supports the current budget of $1.2 million 
and an increase of an additional $1 million to support the work of safety net providers in the local 
community. The needs of local safety net providers are continually growing. For example, with the current 
federal administration’s immigration enforcement actions and rhetoric, TLC anticipates an exponential 
increase in those needing support in immigration proceedings.   
 
Thus, TLC supports the current budget of $1.2 million and an increase of an additional $1 million to the 
the Judiciary’s civil legal services fund. Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of HB400. TLC 
respectfully urges the Committee members to pass HB400 out of your Committee.  If you have questions 
of me, please contact us at director@tlchawaii.org.  
 
Very respectfully yours, 
 
Amy Agbayani  
 
 
 
Bettina Mok 
 
Amy Agbayani, Ph.D. 
 
 
 
Sandy Ma 
Board Member  
 
 
 
Executive Director 
The Legal Clinic  
 
 
 
The Legal Clinic 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Telephone: (808) 536-4302 • Fax: (808) 527-8088 
Mailing Address: P.O. Box 37375 •  Honolulu, Hawaii  96837-0375 
924 Bethel Street •  Honolulu, Hawaii   96813 
 
 
 
David Kauila Kopper 
Executive Director 
 
 
 
 
 
www.legalaidhawaii.org 
A UNITED WAY AGENCY 
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY ON HB400 
 
Committee on Ways and Means 
 
Senator Donovan M. Dela Cruz, Chair 
Senator Sharon Y. Moriwaki, Vice Chair 
The Legal Aid Society of Hawaii submits testimony in strong support of HB400–Relating to the 
Judiciary.  LASH supports the Judiciary’s overall budget priorities, as well as its continued 
administration of funding for statewide civil legal services. 
HB400 contains a line-item for statewide civil legal services, which the Judiciary graciously 
administers to the State’s qualifying legal services providers to provide “general civil legal services 
without charge to indigent residents of the State of Hawaiʻi.” We are asking to supplement this 
line-item with an additional $1 million to ensure that legal service providers have increased 
resources to meet the needs of the communities we serve.  This ask is intended to supplement 
the Judiciary’s legislative priorities, and should not come at the expense of any priority or 
portion of their proposed budget. 
IMPACT OF HB400 
With the support of this line-item, Legal Aid has been able to provide civil legal services to our 
low-income and vulnerable populations across our state. As the state’s largest and oldest legal 
service provider, we deliver legal services in the areas most needed by Hawaiʻi’s residents, 
including family law, housing, domestic abuse, consumer protection, immigration law, public 
benefits, child welfare, and elder law. Legal Aid provides these services statewide through its 12 
offices located in every county and on every island, as well as through our Maui Disaster Legal 
Services office and our Hawaiʻi Immigrant Justice Center. Our over 100 dedicated staff are all 
committed to our mission of obtaining a fair and just Hawaiʻi for all. 
Each year, Legal Aid impacts the lives of approximately 20,000 Hawaiʻi residents. In the last fiscal 
year, we received over 15,000 requests for assistance and were able to provide legal help in a little 
over 7000 cases in legal areas ranging from family, housing, consumer, foreclosure, public 
benefits, elder law, homelessness, immigration, language access, and child welfare. Of those 
served last year, over 2,000 of our clients were homeless or at risk for homelessness, over 1,600 
are Native Hawaiian, over 1,200 experienced domestic violence and about 700 spoke a primary 
language other than English.  
 
 

 
 
NEED FOR INCREASED FUNDING 
We are grateful to the legislature for their past and continuing support of general civil legal services 
in the Judiciary budget, and to the Judiciary for providing a home for this program and 
administering these important funds. However, more funding is urgently needed. 
In Legal Services Corporation’s Justice Gap Report (2022), researchers found that “low-income 
[individuals] did not receive any or enough legal help for 92% of their civil legal problems[,]” 
and that Hawaiʻi is unfortunately consistent with this national average. More than one-half of 
people nationwide have no confidence that they would be able to find a lawyer they could afford 
if they needed one. In Hawaiʻi, at least 72% of households had one or more civil legal problems 
in the past year. Current resources are not meeting our community’s needs: the National Justice 
Index determined that nine times as many legal services attorneys and advocates are needed to 
meet Hawaiʻi low-income residents’ legal needs. 
 
There are now four legal service providers receiving this critical funding, and all of our low-
income and vulnerable populations statewide and across demographics are positively impacted 
by this support. We respectfully request that you increase support for legal services by adding an 
additional $1,000,000 to the line item for legal services, which is an important part of the safety 
net of social services that Hawaiʻi’s residents need.  
 
We are sensitive to the fact that the State is facing significant fiscal pressures due to potential 
federal funding cuts. In addition, changes to the federal funding and policy landscape also 
require additional support for Hawaiʻi’s legal services providers. Recently, there have been 
dramatic reductions in available federal funds for victims of crime and domestic-violence 
survivors. Legal Aid receives substantial federal funds to provide services related to housing, 
assisting Hawaiʻi’s houseless communities, kūpuna legal services, health insurance navigators, 
and more, and is a clear preview of what’s to come. Disaster legal services, which includes over 
one million in funding for Hawaiʻi, was also recently left out of the most recent funding 
resolution. And, we may see attempts to drastically reduce funding for legal services overall. 
 
The Judiciary has been a leader in supporting “access to justice” initiatives here in Hawaiʻi, and 
has generously provided a home for this line-item. Our ask is intended to supplement the 
Judiciary’s legislative priorities, and should not come at the expense of any priority or portion 
of the proposed budget. 
 
Thank you for this opportunity to provide testimony. 
 
Sincerely, 
David Kaulia Kopper  
Executive Director, Legal Aid Society of Hawaiʻi 
 
 
 
 

1100 Alakea Street, Suite 1000 • Honolulu, HI 96813 • Phone: (808) 537-1868 • Fax: (808) 521-7936 • http://HSBA.org 
 
 
OFFICERS 
Mark M. Murakami, President 
Mark K. Murakami, President-Elect 
Kristin E. Izumi-Nitao, Vice President 
Erin M. Kobayashi, Secretary 
Lanson K. Kupau, Treasurer 
 
DIRECTORS 
Jocelyn W.C. Chong 
Steven J.T. Chow 
Jessica R. Domingo 
Geraldine N. Hasegawa (East Hawaii) 
Chastity T. Imamura 
Amanda M. Jones 
Ronette M. Kawakami 
Carol S. Kitaoka (West Hawaii) 
Jacob K. Lowenthal (Maui) 
Simeona L.L.A. Mariano 
Emiko Meyers (Kauai) 
Robert S. Miyashita 
Arsima A. Muller 
Paul W. Naso 
Zale T. Okazaki 
 
YLD PRESIDENT 
Chad K.L. Au 
 
IMMEDIATE PAST PRESIDENT 
Jesse K. Souki 
 
HSBA/ABA DELEGATE 
Leslie A. Hayashi 
 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 
Catherine A. Betts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY 
Senate Committee on Ways & Means  
Hearing: Monday, March 31, 2025 (10:01 AM) 
TO: 
 
Senator Donovan M. Dela Cruz, Chair 
Senator Sharon Y. Moriwaki, Vice Chair 
 
FROM:  
Mark M. Murakami, HSBA President 
 
RE:  
 
HB 400, SD1 - RELATING TO THE JUDICIARY 
 
Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Moriwaki and members of the Committee 
The Hawaii State Bar Association (HSBA) appreciates the opportunity to offer 
testimony in STRONG SUPPORT of HB 400, SD1 – RELATING TO THE 
JUDICIARY.  The State Judiciary plays a vital governmental role in upholding a 
fair and civil society, yet it constitutes only about 2% of the overall State budget. 
Community reports indicate a growing demand for judicial services in the current 
biennium.  It is our firm belief that the Judiciary has demonstrated and continues 
to exhibit fiscal responsibility. Considering these challenges, supporting the 
Judiciary's proposed biennium budget becomes imperative to ensure its ability to 
meet the growing demands efficiently. 
The Judiciary is tasked with some of the most important of all State 
responsibilities. Individuals utilize court services during some of the most stressful 
times of their lives. Families rely on the Judiciary to settle disputes which tear at 
the fabric of their household. Business owners and entrepreneurs rely on the 
Judiciary to resolve contract or insurance issues which threaten their continued 
existence.  Individuals who have been wronged, intentionally or unintentionally, by 
others rely on the Judiciary to make them whole. Those accused of crimes rely on 
the Judiciary to hear their “side of the story” and enforce speedy trial constitutional 
rights, and the government must have an opportunity to present its case on behalf 
of the public.   
It’s critical for the Legislature to provide sufficient support for the State Judiciary 
as provided in their budget request. Thank you for the opportunity to submit these 
comments in STRONG SUPPORT of HB 400, SD1. 
Mahalo for this opportunity to provide testimony in support. 
 

 
 
70170 
  
Nickolas Kacprowski 
Board President  
Rachel Figueroa 
Executive Director  
  
545 Queen Street, Suite 100 
Honolulu, Hawai`i 96813  
Phone: (808) 528-7050  
Fax: (808) 524-2147  
 www.vlsh.org  
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF H.B. 400, HD1, SD1 
RELATING TO THE JUDICIARY 
Committee on Ways and Means  – March 31, 2025  10:01 a.m. 
  
CHAIR DELA CRUZ, VICE CHAIR MORIWAKI AND MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON WAYS AND MEANS:   
  
Volunteer Legal Services Hawai‘i supports the passage of H.B. 400, HD1, SD1. 
 
This critical funding would go to funding civil legal services, including but not limited to the 
delivery of civil legal services to low- and moderate- income individuals in Hawai‘i.  
 
Volunteer Legal is pursuing a one million ($1,000,000) dollar increase in funding for the civil 
legal services line item for providers. The civil legal services line item was initially intended for 
statewide general civil legal service providers. Other important legal service providers are also 
accessing the line item, and we anticipate that more will apply. 
 
Volunteer Legal is concerned about all the federal actions limiting services to those residents 
who need it the most.  We are more worried than ever about the impact that the limiting of services has 
on the safety net of legal services. There are many unmet needs1, and Volunteer Legal is often the last 
line of defense for someone facing critical issues, like landlord/tenant or child custody issues.  
 
 In the last forty-four years, Volunteer Legal has partnered with volunteer attorneys in the 
provision of civil legal assistance to individuals and families of Hawaii.  While Volunteer Legal 
Services Hawai‘i’s only office is on Oahu, we service residents of Hawai‘i statewide.  In 2024, with 
only a staff of 9, Volunteer Legal qualified around 1000 individuals. Volunteer Legal provides legal 
checkups, educational presentations, clinics, brief services and/or full representations.  Twenty-one 
(21%) of those helped are homeless or at the risk of being homeless, 28% of those helped suffer from 
domestic violence, 6% of those helped were veterans, 26% of those helped are disabled, and 20% of 
those helped were aged 60 and over.  If not for Volunteer Legal Services Hawai‘i, these individuals 
would have otherwise gone without legal help.   
 
Our request is not intended to supplant any of the Judiciary’s other priorities. Volunteer Legal 
Services Hawai‘i thanks the committee for the past support of legal services in the judiciary budget. 
We respectfully request your passage of H.B. 400, HD1, SD1.  Thank you for this opportunity to 
provide testimony.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely,  
Rachel Figueroa, Executive Director 
 
 
 
1According to the ALICE (Asset Limited, Income Constrained, Employed) report in 2022, in Hawaii alone, 11% of 
residents were below the Federal Poverty Line (FPL), with 33% that earned above the Federal Poverty Line but not enough 
to afford the basics in the community where they live.  https://unitedforalice.org/national-overview 
“Low-income Americans do not get any or enough legal help for 92% of their substantial civil legal problems.” 
https://justicegap.lsc.gov/resource/executive-summary/ 

HB-400-SD-1 
Submitted on: 3/25/2025 8:56:02 PM 
Testimony for WAM on 3/31/2025 10:01:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Carolyn Weygan-
Hildebrand 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
The legal system is complex, especially for immigrants and their families. Supporting funding 
for legal services for individuals in immigration-related court proceedings is important. 
Mahalo. 
 
