HSCR27
STAND.
COM. REP. NO.
27
Honolulu, Hawaii
,
2025
RE:
H.B. No. 441
H.D.
1
Honorable Nadine K. Nakamura
Speaker, House of Representatives
Thirty-Third State Legislature
Regular Session of 2025
State of Hawaii
Madame:
Your Committee on Health,
to which was referred H.B. No. 441 entitled:
"A BILL FOR AN ACT RELATING TO CIGARETTE
TAXES,"
begs leave to report as follows:
The
purpose of this measure
is to increase
the cigarette tax and allocate the increase to be deposited into the Hawaii
Cancer Research Special Fund.
Your Committee received testimony in support of this measure
from the Department of the Attorney General; Department of Health; University
of Hawai
‘
i Cancer Center; Hawai
‘
i Pacific Health; Hawaii Substance Abuse
Coalition; Hina Mauka; Hawai
‘
i Primary Care Association; The Queen's
Health Systems; Hawaii Medical Association; Coalition for a Tobacco-Free Hawai
ʻ
i; Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids; American
Cancer Society Cancer Action Network; The Friends of Kamalani and Lydgate Park;
Hawaii COPD Coalition; and numerous individuals.
Your Committee received testimony in
opposition to this measure from the Cigar Association of America; Retail
Merchants of Hawaii; and five individuals.
Your Committee received comments on this measure from Department of
Taxation; Tax Foundation; Taxpayers Protection Alliance; and one individual.
Your Committee finds that
cigarette smoking remains the leading cause of preventable death nationally,
and is linked to heart disease, cancer, and stroke.
According to the United States Surgeon
General, increasing the price of tobacco products is the single most effective
way to reduce consumption.
Your
Committee further finds that the University of Hawai
‘
i Cancer
Center receives funding through revenues from the State's cigarette tax
stamp.
However, cigarette tax stamp
revenues have been declining since 2015, resulting in fewer funds going to the
Cancer Center.
Your Committee believes
that increasing taxes on cigarettes and little cigars, as proposed by this
measure, will reduce tobacco consumption in the State and ensure the University
of Hawai
‘
i Cancer
Center receives adequate funding to carry out its important work of building
and launching strategic initiatives to combat cancer.
Your
Committee has amended this measure by:
(1)
Changing the effective date to July 1, 3000,
to encourage further discussion; and
(2)
Making a technical, nonsubstantive amendment
for the purposes of clarity, consistency, and style.
As affirmed by the
record of votes of the members of your Committee on Health that is attached to
this report, your Committee is in accord with the intent and purpose of H.B.
No. 441, as amended herein, and recommends that it pass Second Reading in the form
attached hereto as H.B. No. 441, H.D. 1, and be referred to your Committee on
Higher Education.
Respectfully
submitted on behalf of the members of the Committee on Health,
____________________________
GREGG TAKAYAMA, Chair