HSCR470
STAND.
COM. REP. NO.
470
Honolulu, Hawaii
,
2025
RE:
H.B. No. 441
H.D.
2
Honorable Nadine K. Nakamura
Speaker, House of Representatives
Thirty-Third State Legislature
Regular Session of 2025
State of Hawaii
Madame:
Your Committee on Higher
Education, to which was referred H.B. No. 441, H.D. 1, entitled:
"A BILL FOR AN ACT RELATING TO CIGARETTE
TAXES,"
begs leave to report as follows:
The
purpose of this measure is to increase the cigarette tax beginning July 1,
2025, and allocate the increase in the cigarette tax amount to be deposited
into the Hawaii Cancer Research Special Fund.
Your Committee received testimony in support of this measure
from the Department of the Attorney General; Department of Health; University
of Hawaii Cancer Center; Hawaii Substance Abuse Coalition; Hina Mauka; Hawaii
Medical Association; Hawai
ʻ
i Pacific Health;
Waianae Coast Comprehensive Health Center; Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids; The
Queen's Health Systems; Coalition for a Tobacco-Free Hawai
ʻ
i;
American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network; Hawai
ʻ
i
Health & Harm Reduction Center; American Lung Association; Kobayashi Group;
and numerous individuals.
Your Committee
received testimony in opposition to this measure from Japan Tobacco
International U.S.A., Inc.; Hawaii Smokers Alliance; Marukin Market; BMA Mart;
Cigar Association of America; Wawa Market; Kilani Market; and seven
individuals.
Your Committee received
comments on this measure from the Department of Taxation; Tax Foundation of
Hawaii; and Tax Foundation.
Your Committee
finds that funding from the cigarette tax has been instrumental since the
Hawaii Cancer Research Special Fund's inception in 2006, enabling the
construction of the University of Hawaii Cancer Center building and the
launching of strategic initiatives to combat cancer.
However, due to the success of smoking
cessation efforts, this allocation has declined, indicating both progress in
public health and a concerning decrease in resources for the initiatives that
have fueled this advancement.
Your
Committee believes that an increase in the cigarette tax will restore funding
for the University of Hawaii Cancer Center and expand its capacity to conduct
groundbreaking research and deliver patient care to save more lives across the
State.
Your Committee has
amended this measure by:
(1)
Changing the cigarette
tax amount and dispositions of the cigarette tax revenue to unspecified amounts
;
and
(2)
Making technical, nonsubstantive amendments
for the purposes of clarity, consistency, and style.
Your Committee respectfully requests your Committee on Finance,
should it deliberate on this measure, to consider:
(1)
Establishing a tax rate of 18.00 cents for
each cigarette or little cigar sold, used, or possessed by a wholesaler or
dealer on and after July 1, 2025; and
(2)
After June 30, 2025, depositing the following
amounts from the cigarette tax revenue into the appropriate special funds:
(A)
4.0 cents per cigarette to be deposited to the
credit of the Hawaii Cancer Research Special Fund;
(B)
1.125 cents per cigarette, but no more than
$7,400,000 in a fiscal year, to be deposited to the credit of the Trauma System
Special Fund;
(C)
1.25 cents per cigarette, but no more than
$8,800,000 in a fiscal year, to be deposited to the credit of the Community
Health Centers Special Fund; and
(D)
1.25 cents per cigarette, but no more than
$8,800,000 in a fiscal year, to be deposited to the credit of the Emergency
Medical Services Special Fund.
As affirmed by the
record of votes of the members of your Committee on Higher Education that is
attached to this report, your Committee is in accord with the intent and
purpose of H.B. No. 441, H.D. 1, as amended herein, and recommends that it be
referred to your Committee on Finance in the form attached hereto as H.B. No.
441, H.D. 2.
Respectfully
submitted on behalf of the members of the Committee on Higher Education,
____________________________
ANDREW TAKUYA GARRETT, Chair