SSCR1254
STAND. COM. REP. NO.
1254
Honolulu,
Hawaii
RE:
H.B. No. 70
H.D. 1
S.D. 1
Honorable Ronald D. Kouchi
President of the Senate
Thirty-Third State Legislature
Regular Session of 2025
State of Hawaii
Sir:
Your Committee on
Commerce and Consumer Protection, to which was referred H.B. No. 70,
H.D. 1, entitled:
"A BILL FOR AN ACT RELATING TO CONDOMINIUM,"
begs leave to report as follows:
The
purpose and intent of this measure is to:
(1)
Specify that a condominium association's
budget summary shall have all required information without referring the reader
to other portions of the budget;
(2)
Explicitly state that the defense of good
faith compliance is not available to a condominium association whose board
adopts a budget that omits the required budget summary; and
(3)
Clarify the ability to enforce compliance with
the budget summary and replacement reserves requirements and provide that an
association has the burden of proving compliance.
Your Committee
received testimony in support of this measure from Hawaii First Realty, Hawai
ʻ
i Association of
REALTORS, Community Associations Institute, and seven individuals.
Your Committee
received testimony in opposition to this measure from Honolulu Tower; Hawaii
Council of Community Associations; Law Offices of Mark K. McKellar, LLLC; and
fifteen individuals.
Your Committee
finds that the financial transparency of a condominium association is essential
for condominium unit owners to keep informed of an association's financial
health.
Recent amendments to existing
law require, among other things, that condominium associations prepare a
detailed budget summary to better inform unit owners of their financial
condition.
Your Committee further finds that
additional clarification is needed to further effectuate the goal to increase financial
transparency between associations and condominium unit owners.
This measure also aims to prevent
associations from misleading consumers by omitting important financial
information from their budget summaries under the good-faith defense provisions.
Your Committee
notes the concerns raised in testimony, however, that given the comprehensive
list of requirements for the budget summary required by this measure, an
association could easily inadvertently omit information from the summary, or
the information provided in the summary may later turn out to be inaccurate or
incomplete.
If a specific component is
inadvertently omitted from the summary and the omission is not disclosed, an
association could be accused of breaching its duty by failing to meet all the
budget summary requirements, even if the association acted in good faith.
Therefore, to prevent unnecessary litigation
or disputes, amendments are necessary to address this issue.
Accordingly, your
Committee has amended this measure by:
(1)
Removing language that would have barred the
defense of good faith for any condominium association whose board adopts a
budget that omits the budget summary required by section 514B-148(a), Hawaii
Revised Statutes; and
(2)
Amending section 1 to reflect its amended
purpose.
As affirmed by the
record of votes of the members of your Committee on Commerce and Consumer
Protection that is attached to this report, your Committee is in accord with
the intent and purpose of H.B. No. 70, H.D. 1, as amended herein, and
recommends that it pass Second Reading in the form attached hereto as H.B. No. 70,
H.D. 1, S.D. 1, and be referred to your Committee on Judiciary.
Respectfully submitted on behalf
of the members of the Committee on Commerce and Consumer Protection,
________________________________
JARRETT
  KEOHOKALOLE, Chair