 
 
 
 
 
STATE HEALTH PLANNING 
 
AND DEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH - KA ʻOIHANA OLAKINO 
 
 
 
JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR OF HAWAIʻI 
KE KIAʻĀINA O KA MOKUʻĀINA ʻO HAWAIʻI 
 
KENNETH S. FINK, MD, MGA, MPH 
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH 
KA LUNA HOʻOKELE 
 
JOHN C. (JACK) LEWIN, M.D. 
ADMINISTRATOR 
 
 
 
1177 Alakea St., #402, Honolulu, HI 96813 Phone: 587-0788 Fax:  587-0783 www.shpda.org 
March 28, 2025  
 
To:  
 
COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS  
 
           Senator Donovan M. Dela Cruz, Chair;  
                      Senator Sharon Y. Moriwaki, Vice Chair; and 
 
 
Honorable Members 
 
From: 
John C (Jack) Lewin MD, Administrator, SHPDA and 
Senior Advisor to Governor Green on Healthcare Innovation 
 
Re: 
 
HB441, HD2 SD1 - Relating to Cigarette Taxes 
  
Hearing: 
March 31, 2025 @ 10:02 pm; Conference Room 211 & Videoconference 
 
Position:  
SUPPORT 
--------------------------------------- 
Testimony: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SHPDA fully and strongly supports the intent of this bill which increases the tax 
rates for cigarettes and little cigars to 18.00 cents beginning 1/1/2026, amends the 
disposition of tax revenues to certain non-general funds starting from fiscal year 2026-
2027, with the excess carrying over to the general fund, and expands the tax disposition 
of tax revenues to the funds to include all tobacco product taxes. This bill also repeals 
obsolete historical tax rates.   
 
 
A key part of SHPDA’s mission is to promote universal access to high-quality, 
equitable, and affordable healthcare, which includes using health data to systematically 
monitor and promote improvements in healthcare outcomes and population health, 
including advancing disease prevention and promotion of medical research to help 
support these goals.  
 
 
Raising cigarette taxes has been demonstrated to reduce rates of smoking, 
which in turn reduces the incidence of lung cancer, emphysema, heart disease, and 
various other causes of cancer and chronic illness.  
 
 
Mahalo for the opportunity to testify.  
 
 
  

WRITTEN TESTIMONY OF 
THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL 
KA ‘OIHANA O KA LOIO KUHINA 
THIRTY-THIRD LEGISLATURE, 2025 
 
 
ON THE FOLLOWING MEASURE: 
H.B. NO. 441, H.D. 2, S.D. 1, RELATING TO CIGARETTE TAXES. 
 
BEFORE THE: 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS 
 
DATE: 
Monday, March 31, 2025 
TIME:  10:02 a.m. 
LOCATION: State Capitol, Room 211 
TESTIFIER(S): 
WRITTEN TESTIMONY ONLY. 
(For more information, contact Richard W. Stacey, 
 Deputy Attorney General, at 808-586-1199) 
 
 
Chair Dela Cruz and Members of the Committee: 
The Department of the Attorney General (Department) supports this bill and 
offers the following comments. 
The purpose of this bill is to increase the tax rate on each cigarette or little cigar 
sold from sixteen cents to eighteen cents.  Additionally, the bill amends the disposition 
of cigarette tax revenues by allocating the two-cent increase in the tax to the University 
of Hawaii for purposes of debt reduction for the Cancer Research Center of Hawaii. 
Cigarette tax stamp revenues have plummeted, from over $116 million in fiscal 
year 2015-2016 to just over $70 million in fiscal year 2023-2024.  This decline has 
affected the funding for the University of Hawaii Cancer Center, community health 
centers, trauma centers, and emergency medical services. 
Similarly, the Department’s Tobacco Enforcement Special Fund (Fund) has 
experienced a revenue decline due to reduced cigarettes sales.  The Fund receives 
revenue from the cigarette tax stamp fee, which is directly tied to the cost of the 
cigarette tax stamp (see section 245-26, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)).  The revenue 
deposited into the Fund has dropped from $1.74 million in fiscal year 2015-2016 to 
$1.03 million in 2023-2024.  To ensure continued diligent enforcement of the Master 
Settlement Agreement (MSA), the Department needs to recuperate funding to the Fund. 

Testimony of the Department of the Attorney General 
Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 
Page 2 of 3 
 
In 1998, Hawaii and 45 other states signed the MSA with the four largest U.S. 
tobacco manufacturers to settle smoking-related claims.  Under the MSA, these 
manufacturers provide annual payments to the signing states, including Hawaii.  To 
maintain these payments, states must diligently enforce the requirements of the "model 
statute," which Hawaii enacted as the Tobacco Liability Act, chapter 675, HRS.  The 
Legislature established the Fund in 2001 for the Department to administer, monitor, and 
enforce the MSA, the cigarette tax stamp program, and any other related statutes or 
programs (see section 28-15(a), HRS). 
If enforcement is deemed insufficient, tobacco manufacturers may challenge the 
payment, potentially leading to arbitration and significant financial losses to Hawaii.  
Hawaii received over $36.4 million in MSA payments for fiscal year 2023-2024.  Recent 
arbitration decisions found Washington, Missouri, and New Mexico non-diligent, 
jeopardizing their annual MSA payments.  These decisions highlight a critical need for 
stable funding for the Department to maintain and further its diligent enforcement efforts 
and reduce the risk of losing MSA revenue. 
The attached chart demonstrates the flow of the cigarette and tobacco tax and 
license money, based on the current taxing scheme. 
On page 14, lines 9-13, the bill amends the disposition of cigarette tax revenues 
by allocating the two-cent increase in the tax to be deposited with the Director of 
Finance to be payable to the University of Hawaii for the Cancer Research Center of 
Hawaii's debt reduction.  The current wording does not specify a fund for deposit, such 
as a special fund or the general fund, creating ambiguity as to which fund would receive 
the additional money.  Further, the stated purpose on page 4, lines 1-3, indicates the 
increase is intended to be deposited into the Hawaii Cancer Research Special Fund.  
Therefore, for consistency and to avoid confusion, we recommend the following 
amendments  
1.  Delete section 245-15(7)(E), HRS, on page 14, lines 9-13; and 
2.  Amend section 245-15(7)(A), HRS, on page 13, lines 11-15, to read (changes 
in bold): 
(A)  4.0 cents per cigarette shall be deposited to the credit of the 
Hawaii cancer research special fund, established pursuant to 

Testimony of the Department of the Attorney General 
Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 
Page 3 of 3 
 
section 304A-2168, for research and operating expenses and for 
capital expenditures; provided that of each amount deposited 
to the credit of the Hawaii cancer research special fund, 2.0 
cents per cigarette shall be used exclusively for debt service 
of capital expenditures; 
We respectfully urge the Committee to pass the bill with the suggested 
amendments.  For the implementation of a new tax stamp rate and the effective date, 
the Department defers to the Department of Taxation. 
Thank you for this opportunity to testify. 

Cigarette Tax 
$ 0.16/cigarette
Denominated 
Value of Stamp:
$3.20 
§245‐3, HRS
Hawaii Cancer Research Special Fund
Emergency Medical Services Special Fund
Community Health Centers Special Fund
Trauma System Special Fund 
2 cents per cigarette
Tobacco 
Enforcement Special 
Fund (ATG)
Cigarette Tax Stamp 
Administrative 
Special Fund (DOTAX)
Remainder
1.5%
General Fund
~$58,789,339 (FY24)
0.2%
$8,606,752 (FY 24)
$4,841,298 (FY 24)
$5,379,220 (FY 24)
$5,379,220 (FY 24)
Large Cigars
50% of wholesale
§245‐3, HRS
$2,106,800 (FY24)
ESDs & e‐liquids* and all 
other tobacco products
70% of wholesale
§245‐3, HRS
$12,083,794 (FY24)
*Tax on ESDs & e‐liquids began on 1/1/24
$50.00/retail permit
§245‐2.5, HRS
$60,590 (FY24)
$250.00/license fee
§245‐2, HRS
$48,280 (FY24)
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO TAX AND LICENSE MONEY
§245‐15, HRS
1.125 cents per cigarette 
(up to $7,400,000)
Stamp Fee 
additional 1.7% of denominated value of stamp (~$0.05)
§ 245‐26, HRS
$1,032,810 (FY24)
$137,708 (FY 24)
$3.20 Cigarette Tax 
~$0.05 Stamp Fee  
~$3.25 price per stamp
1.25 cents per cigarette 
(up to $8,800,000)
1.25 cents per cigarette 
(up to $8,800,000)
Little Cigars
$0.16/little cigar
§245‐3, HRS
$84,913 (FY24)
Total Cigarette 
Revenue:
$70,092,426 (FY24)

UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I SYSTEM 
ʻŌNAEHANA KULANUI O HAWAIʻI   
Legislative Testimony 
Hōʻike Manaʻo I Mua O Ka ʻAhaʻōlelo 
_____________________________________________________________ 
1 
Testimony Presented Before the 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
Monday, March 31, 2025 at 10:02 a.m. 
By 
Naoto T. Ueno, Director 
University of Hawai‘i Cancer Center 
And 
Michael Bruno, Provost 
University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa 
HB 441 HD2 SD1 – RELATING TO CIGARETTE TAXES 
 
Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki, and Members of the Committee: 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to present our testimony today. The University of Hawaiʻi Cancer 
Center (UH Cancer Center) is in strong support with a suggested amendment of HB 441 
HD2 SD1, which, as originally introduced, would increase the cigarette tax from $0.16 to $0.18 
per cigarette. Currently, the cigarette tax revenues are allocated where $0.02 supports Hawaiʻi’s 
Cancer Center. HB 441 HD2 SD1 would provide for the additional $0.02 in the cigarette tax 
amount to be deposited with the director of finance to be payable to the University of Hawaiʻi for 
the purposes of debt reduction for the Cancer Research Center of Hawaiʻi.   
 
The UH Cancer Center appreciates the intent of HB 441 HD2 SD1 to address the debt service 
of the UH Cancer Center, but feels it would be beneficial to have the additional revenue 
deposited directly to the credit of the Hawaiʻi Cancer Research Special Fund rather than to the 
director of finance. The UH Cancer Center requests the following amendment to subparagraph 
(A) on page 13, lines 11-15, to read as follows:  
 
4.0 cents per cigarette shall be deposited to the credit of the Hawaii cancer research 
special fund, established pursuant to section 304A-2168, for research and operating 
expenses and for capital expenditures; provided that of each amount deposited to the 
credit of the Hawaii cancer research special fund, 2.0 cents per cigarette shall be used 
exclusively for debt service of capital expenditures;   
 
If the above-mentioned amendment is included, subparagraph (E) on page 14, lines 9-13, 
can be deleted. 
 
Funding from the cigarette tax has been instrumental since this fund’s inception in 2006, 
enabling the construction of the UH Cancer Center building and the launching of strategic 
initiatives to combat cancer. However, due to the success of smoking cessation efforts, 
this allocation has declined, indicating both progress in public health and a concerning 
decrease in resources for the initiatives that have fueled this advancement. Now providing 
less than half the funding compared with that of 2009, this source of allocation is no longer 
able to support its original intent to provide a top-notch facility, and to invest in the most 
promising cancer research, clinical care and community outreach. 

2 
 
An increase would bring profound benefits for the people of our community. Restoring 
cigarette-tax funding would empower the UH Cancer Center to attract and retain more 
top-tier scientists and clinicians, thus expanding our capacity to conduct groundbreaking 
research and deliver cutting-edge patient care and saving more lives across Hawaiʻi and 
the Pacific. 
 
Returns on this investment will be multifold:  
 
Investment in Tobacco Research is an Investment in the Health and Well-being of  
Our Community  
 
More than 70,000 people in this state are living with cancer and praying for a cure, 
and each year, 2,300 Hawai‘i residents die of this terrible disease. The UH Cancer 
Center is a leader of the Hawai‘i Cancer Consortium, a collaborative network of 
major healthcare and community partners working to improve cancer outcomes for 
residents of Hawaiʻi as well as those in the broader Pacific Rim region: The Queen’s 
Health Systems, Hawai‘i Pacific Health, Adventist Health Castle, Kuakini Medical 
Center, Hilo Benioff Medical Center, Hawaiʻi Medical Service Association (HMSA), 
and UH Mānoa’s John A. Burns School of Medicine. Cigarette tax funding has 
supported and provided the infrastructure for developing evidence-based programs 
to understand the health behaviors underlying tobacco use, including:  
 
• 
Developing and testing culturally tailored interventions to promote smoking 
cessation among Native Hawaiians, Pacific Islanders, Asian Americans, and 
low-income populations; 
• 
Conducting longitudinal studies on the patterns, predictors, and 
consequences of e-cigarette use among adolescents and young adults in 
Hawaiʻi;  
• 
Evaluating the impact of tobacco control policies, such as smoke-free laws, 
tobacco taxes, and minimum legal age of sale, on tobacco use behaviors and 
health outcomes;  
• 
Providing evidence-based knowledge to inform public health officials and 
regulatory authorities on how to regulate tobacco products effectively and in a way 
that best serves individuals and public health;  
• 
Conducting tobacco-related research to advance health equity and prevent the 
initiation of tobacco use among youth and young adults.  
 
Investment in the UH Cancer Center is an Investment in Economic Growth 
 
The UH Cancer Center attracts federal grants and collaboration that contribute to our 
local economy. As one of only 73 National Cancer Institute-designated cancer centers, it 
is in the top 4% of cancer centers across the nation, and was scored as an “outstanding” 
cancer center in its most recent full five-year renewal. The UH Cancer Center positions 
Hawaiʻi as a leader in cutting-edge cancer research and clinical care that serves our 
community, and generates revenues from patients seeking treatment and care 
customized to the needs of our diverse Pacific Asian populations.  
 
Funding the UH Cancer Center enables it to provide for:  
 

3 
• 
Attracting committed and world-class researchers and clinical investigators with 
start-up packages; such new faculty recruits will increase federal grants and 
groundbreaking discoveries in cancer prevention, treatment, and care;  
• 
Addressing the shortage of specialized oncology practitioners in Hawaiʻi;  
• 
Attracting pharmaceutical companies that will partner with the UH Cancer Center 
and hospitals to fund clinical trials for patients in Hawaiʻi, Asia, and the Pacific 
regions.  
 
Investment in the UH Cancer Center Paves A New Way Forward in Research and 
Cancer Care 
 
Now is the time to prioritize cancer research, and demonstrate our commitment to 
improving the health and well-being of our communities and providing the best treatment 
for our patients. By 2050, cancer cases worldwide are expected to increase by 77%, to 
over 35 million, and cancer deaths are projected to nearly double, to 18.5 million, 
according to the World Health Organization. Residents of Hawai‘i and the Pacific will not 
be immune from this grim trend. Investing in cancer research impacts the community by 
providing better quality cancer treatment and prevention. It enables recruitment of 
disease-expert cancer doctors rather than general oncologists. By directing additional 
funds towards cancer research and clinical trials, we can harness the full potential of the 
UH Cancer Center and foster an environment where innovative cancer treatments and 
prevention are developed, benefiting cancer patients across Hawaiʻi and the Pacific, and 
beyond. 
 
Based on the above, we believe that an increased allocation of 2 cents per cigarette tax 
would be financially beneficial to provide investment in the UH Cancer Center to keep 
Hawaiʻi at the forefront of cancer research, and ensure that our communities receive the 
care and resources they need and deserve. Prioritizing the UH Cancer Center through this 
tax change is not merely a fiscal decision, but a statement of our collective commitment to 
the health and prosperity of Hawaiʻi’s people. The benefits of this investment will resonate 
far beyond the immediate fiscal year, strengthening a steadfast path toward a future 
where cancer can be effectively combatted. 
 
Thank you for this opportunity to testify. 

JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
 GOVERNOR OF HAWAII 
KE KIAʻĀINA O KA MOKUʻĀINA ʻO HAWAIʻI 
KENNETH S. FINK, MD, MGA, MPH 
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH 
KA LUNA HOʻOKELE 
 
STATE OF HAWAII 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 
KA ʻOIHANA OLAKINO 
P.O. Box 3378 
Honolulu, HI  96801-3378 
doh.testimony@doh.hawaii.gov 
 
 
 
 
WRITTEN 
TESTIMONY ONLY 
Testimony in SUPPORT of H.B. 441, H.D. 2, S.D. 1 
RELATING TO CIGARETTE TAXES 
SENATOR DONAVAN M. DELA CRUZ, CHAIR 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS 
 
 
Hearing Date:  March 31, 2025 
 
 
Room Number:  Conference Room 211 and 
   Videoconference 
Fiscal Implications:  The fiscal impact of an increase in excise tax on cigarettes and little cigars 
1 
in Hawaii would result in increases in state tax revenues while at the same time leading to 
2 
reductions in cigarette consumption, chronic diseases, and health care spending, including 
3 
Medicaid spending in the state. 
4 
Department Position:  The Department of Health (DOH) supports House Bill 441, House Draft 2, 
5 
Senate Draft 1 (H.B. 441, H.D. 2, S.D. 1) which would impose an excise tax equal to 18.00 cents 
6 
for each cigarette or little cigar sold, used, or possessed by a wholesaler or dealer and allocates 
7 
the increase in cigarette tax to the Hawaii Cancer Research Special Fund for the purposes of 
8 
debt reduction for the Cancer Research Center of Hawaii.  The DOH respectfully offers 
9 
amendments to increase the tax by 5.00 cents for each cigarette and little cigar sold, used, or 
10 
possessed by a wholesaler or dealer on and after January 1, 2026, in order to maximize the 
11 
public health impact of this measure. 
12 
Department Testimony:  According to the U.S. Surgeon General, increasing the price of tobacco 
13 
products is the single most effective way to reduce consumption.1  A ten percent increase in 
14 
 
1 HHS, Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General, 2012, 
http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/preventing-youth-tobacco-use/full-report.pdf  

H.B. 441, H.D. 2, S.D. 1 
Page 2 of 3 
 
 
price has been estimated to reduce overall cigarette consumption by 3-5%.2  Research also 
1 
suggests that both youth and young adults are two to three times more likely to respond to 
2 
increases in price than adults.3 
3 
 
The burden of tobacco use is disproportionally experienced by Hawaii’s communities 
4 
and population groups.  Due to the intentional marketing practices of the tobacco industry, 
5 
Native Hawaiian (14.1%), individuals who identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender 
6 
(10.3%), those who are of low socioeconomic status (18.9%), and those with behavioral health 
7 
conditions (14.5%), or drink excessively (15.9%) have higher smoking prevalence than the state 
8 
prevalence rate from 2023 (9.0%).4 
9 
 
Cigarette smoking persists as the leading cause of preventable death nationally5 and is 
10 
linked to heart disease, cancer, and stroke which were also the leading causes of death in 
11 
Hawaii in 2021.6  Each year an estimated 1,400 Hawaii adults die from smoking.7  The Centers 
12 
for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that smoking causes approximately 90% of all 
13 
lung cancer deaths and 80% of all deaths from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.8,9 
14 
Cigarette smoking also takes a financial toll on the state.  The annual estimated health 
15 
care costs directly caused by smoking in Hawaii is $611 million.10  Smoking-caused government 
16 
 
2 HHS, Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General, 2012, 
http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/preventing-youth-tobacco-use/full-report.pdf  
3 HHS, Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General, 2012, 
http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/preventing-youth-tobacco-use/full-report.pdf  
4 Hawaiʻi Health Data Warehouse – BRFSS (2023) 
5 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences of Smoking—50 Years of Progress: A Report of the Surgeon 
General. Atlanta: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic 
Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, 2014 [accessed 2017 Apr 20]. 
6 HHDW. New: Leading Causes of Death Report Series. November 1, 2023. https://hhdw.org/na-leading-causes-of-death-reports/  
7 Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids. Toll of Tobacco in Hawaii. August 16, 2024. https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/problem/toll-us/hawaii  
8 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences of Smoking—50 Years of Progress: A Report of the Surgeon 
General. Atlanta: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic 
Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, 2014 [accessed 2017 Apr 20]. 
9 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. How Tobacco Smoke Causes Disease: What It Means to You. Atlanta: U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, 
Office on Smoking and Health, 2010 [accessed 2017 Apr 20]. 
10 Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids. The Toll of Tobacco in Hawaii. August 16, 2024. https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/problem/toll-us/hawaii 

H.B. 441, H.D. 2, S.D. 1 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
expenditures result in a tax burden of $955.00 per household and $1.1 billion in lost 
1 
productivity in Hawaii.11 
2 
The World Health Organization recommends that tobacco taxes should be raised 
3 
significantly and at regular intervals to ensure that tobacco products do not become more 
4 
affordable.12  The last cigarette tax increase in Hawaii was 14 years ago in 201113 and there was 
5 
an observed decrease in high school cigarette use from years prior which continued steadily 
6 
thereafter.14 
7 
The DOH supports H.B. 441, H.D. 2, S.D. 1 to increase the excise tax on cigarettes and 
8 
little cigars as a proven public health policy to prevent youth from starting and to help adults to 
9 
quit smoking.  The DOH respectfully offers amendments to increase the tax by 5.00 cents for 
10 
each cigarette and little cigar sold, used, or possessed by a wholesaler or dealer on and after 
11 
January 1, 2026. 
12 
Offered Amendments:   
13 
Section 1. Section 245-3(a)(12), on page 7, line 1, insert “21.00” as follows: 
14 
(12)    21.00 cents for each cigarette or little cigar sold,  
15 
 
16 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this measure. 
17 
 
11 Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids. The Toll of Tobacco in Hawaii. August 16, 2024. https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/problem/toll-us/hawaii 
12 Raise taxes on tobacco. (n.d.). Retrieved January 31, 2024, from https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/themes/topics/raise-taxes-on-tobacco 
13Act 59, HB1985, CD1, SLH 2010, retrieved 2/01/24 from https://www.capitol.hawaii.gov/sessions/session2010/bills/HB1985_CD1_.pdf  
14 HHDW. (2005-2021). Youth Risk Behavior Survey (YRBS) Current smoking- high school. 
https://hhdw.org/report/query/result/yrbs/CigsCurr/CigsCurr_HS_ST.html 

JOSH GREEN M.D. 
GOVERNOR 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
LT. GOVERNOR 
STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
DEPARTMENT OF TAXATION 
Ka ‘Oihana ‘Auhau 
P.O. BOX 259 
HONOLULU, HAWAI‘I 96809 
PHONE NO: (808) 587-1540 
FAX NO: (808) 587-1560 
GARY S. SUGANUMA 
DIRECTOR  
 
KRISTEN M.R. SAKAMOTO 
DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF 
GARY S. SUGANUMA, DIRECTOR OF TAXATION 
 
 
TESTIMONY ON THE FOLLOWING MEASURE: 
H.B. No. 441, H.D. 2, S.D.1, Relating to Cigarette Taxes 
 
BEFORE THE: 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
 
 
DATE: 
 
Monday, March 31, 2025 
TIME:  
 
10:02 a.m. 
LOCATION:  
State Capitol, Room 211 
 
 
Chair Dela Cruz, Vice-Chair Moriwaki, and Committee Members: 
 
The Department of Taxation (DOTAX) offers the following comments regarding 
H.B. 441, H.D. 2, S.D.1, for your consideration. 
 
Section 2 of H.B. 441, H.D. 2, S.D.1, amends section 245-3, Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS), by increasing the cigarette tax to 18.00 cents for each cigarette or little 
cigar sold, used, or possessed by a wholesaler or dealer on and after January 1, 2026.   
 
Section 3 of H.B. 441, H.D. 2, S.D.1, amends section 245-15, HRS, by amending 
the disposition of cigarette tax revenues after December 31, 2025, and thereafter, as 
follows: 
 
• 2.0 cents per cigarette to the Hawaii Cancer Research Special Fund; 
 
• The lesser of 1.125 cents per cigarette or $7,400,000 in a fiscal year to the 
Trauma System Special Fund; 
 
• The lesser of 1.25 cents per cigarette or $8,800,000 in a fiscal year to the 
Community Health Centers Special Fund;  
 
• The lesser of 1.25 cents per cigarette or $8,800,000 in a fiscal year to the 

Department of Taxation Testimony 
H.B. 441, H.D.2, S.D.1 
March 31, 2025 
Page 2 of 2 
 
Emergency Medical Services Special Fund; and  
 
• 2.0 cents per cigarette to the University of Hawaii for the purposes of debt 
reduction for the Cancer Research Center of Hawaii. 
 
The measure has a defective effective date of December 31, 2050.  
 
DOTAX can administer the changes in this bill by January 1, 2026. 
 
DOTAX estimates no material revenue impact to the general fund.   
 
DOTAX estimates a special fund revenue gain as follows: 
 
Special Fund Impact ($ millions)  
FY 2026  
(11 months)  
FY 2027  
FY 2028  
FY 2029  
FY 2030  
FY 2031  
$4.7  
$4.8  
$4.5  
$4.3  
$4.0  
$3.8  
 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments on this measure.  

 
 
HB441 HD2 SD1 Cigarette Taxes 
COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS  
Senator Donovan M. Dela Cruz, Chair 
Senator Sharon Y. Moriwaki, Vice Chair 
Monday, Mar 31, 2025: 10:02: Room 211 Videoconference 
 
 
 
Hawaii Substance Abuse Coalition Supports HB441 HD2 SD1: 
 
ALOHA CHAIR, VICE CHAIR, AND DISTINGUISHED COMMITTEE MEMBERS. My 
name is Alan Johnson. I am the current chair of the Hawaii Substance Abuse 
Coalition (HSAC), a statewide organization for substance use disorder and co-
occurring mental health disorder treatment and prevention agencies and recovery-
oriented services. 
 
 
HSAC supports the increase in cigarette taxes from 16 cents to 18 cents that is 
customary to happen every few years and is supportive of any efforts to 
increase the tax.  
  
HSAC supports that the amount of tax increase go to the Hawaii Cancer 
research special fund to reduce its debt. 
 
We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony and are available for 
questions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The increase ultimately provides revenue to the state and discourages youth use.  

3610 Waialae Ave ⚫ Honolulu, HI 96816 
 (808) 592-4200 
tyamaki@rmhawaii.org 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF TINA YAMAKI 
PRESIDENT 
RETAIL MERCHANTS OF HAWAII 
MARCH 31, 2025 
HB 441 HD2 SD1 RELATING TO CIGARETTE TAX 
 
Aloha, Chair Dela Cruz and members of the Senate Committee on Ways and Means. I am Tina 
Yamaki, President of the Retail Merchants of Hawaii. 
 
The Retail Merchants of Hawaii was founded in 1901, RMH is a statewide, not for profit trade 
organization committed to the growth and development of the retail industry in Hawaii. Our 
membership includes small mom & pop stores, large box stores, resellers, luxury retail, department 
stores, shopping malls, local, national, and international retailers, chains, and everyone in between. 
 
We respectfully strongly oppose HB 441 HD 2 SD1 Relating to Cigarette Taxes. This measure 
beginning 1/1/2026, increases the cigarette tax from sixteen cents to eighteen cents and amends the 
disposition of cigarette tax revenues by allocating the increase in the cigarette tax amount for debt 
reduction for the Cancer Research Center of Hawaiʻi; and is effective 12/31/2050. (SD1). 
 
While we acknowledge the importance of funding critical health services such as cancer research,  
increasing the cigarette tax places a disproportionate financial burden on consumers, particularly 
lower-income individuals who are already struggling with the high cost of living in Hawai‘i. 
 
Additionally, continual increases in the cigarette tax may lead to unintended consequences, including: 
 
Placing economic harm to many of our small local businesses. Increasing the cigarette tax 
places a disproportionate burden on small retailers, who are already struggling with competing prices 
and maintain sales to sustain their operations and keep their doors open. For businesses already 
grappling with Hawaii’s excessive costs, this increase threatens their viability, potentially leading to 
job losses and closures in an already fragile economic climate.  
 
Alternatively having more consumers finding ways to purchase these items on Military Bases 
and Tax Avoidance. With numerous military bases in Hawai‘i, many residents will turn to friends and 
family in the military to purchase cigarettes at lower, tax-exempt prices on base. This will further 
decrease state tax revenue while putting local retailers at a competitive disadvantage. 
 
Incentivizes shoplifting and a rise in the illegal black-market. The higher price of these types of 
goods would only make it more attractive to shoplift. We have seen a significant spike in theft of 
tobacco and vape products. Excessive tax hikes also create a financial incentive for black-market 
sales, smuggling, and counterfeit products. This undermines legitimate retailers and reduces the 
state’s overall tax revenue, defeating the purpose of the proposed increase. This not only results in 
financial losses for businesses but also contributes to a rise in organized retail crime. 
 
Creating a Regressing Taxation. In addition, there is a regressive financial impact on consumers. 
Cigarette taxes disproportionately affect low-income individuals, who endure the most of these 
 	

3610 Waialae Ave ⚫ Honolulu, HI 96816 
 (808) 592-4200 
tyamaki@rmhawaii.org 
 
increases. Raising the tax further deepens financial inequities for Hawaii residents already struggling 
to afford basic necessities in one of the most expensive states in the nation.  
 
Furthermore, an increase in the cigarette tax is an unstable revenue source for cancer 
research. Cigarette consumption has been steadily declining due to increased awareness and 
existing tax measures. Tying funding for critical research and other special funds to an unstable 
revenue source creates long-term financial uncertainty for the Hawaiʻi Cancer Research Special 
Fund. Alternative, more sustainable funding mechanisms should be considered for this or any other 
special fund. 
 
By raising the cigarette tax, it is a misguided approach to funding health initiatives. While addressing 
cancer and other medical funds is important, it is inappropriate to rely on taxes that 
disproportionately impact specific populations. Broader-based funding methods would ensure 
equity and stability without creating unintended negative consequences. 
 
We recommend exploring more equitable and sustainable funding strategies that do not place undue 
burdens on businesses and low-income residents or encourage illicit market activity. 
 
We urge you to hold this measure. Mahalo again for this opportunity to testify.  
 

 
Senator Donovan Dela Cruz, Chair 
Senator Sharon Moriwaki, Vice Chair 
Members of the Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
​
 
 
On behalf of the Coalition for a Tobacco-Free Hawaiʻi’s (CTFH) Youth Council, thank you for 
allowing us to submit testimony in strong support of HB441_HD2_SD1.​  
​
 
Tobacco is the leading cause of preventable death in Hawai’i, resulting in 1,400 deaths every 
year. 95% of smokers start before the age of 21; raising the cost of a pack of cigarettes by at 
least a dollar a pack will make youth think twice about starting and help to break the vicious 
cycle of addiction among our most vulnerable populations. Raising the cost will also encourage 
adult smokers to quit.  
 
Native Hawaiians are disproportionately impacted by tobacco. The industry has a troubling 
history in our island home. From exploiting Native Hawaiian labor on tobacco plantations to the 
image of sexualized “hula girls” on cigarette advertisements, Big Tobacco has capitalized on 
Hawaiʻi’s unique culture and legacy of colonialism to turn a profit off the backs of the most 
vulnerable.  
 
For many, commercial tobacco use has manifested into a coping mechanism, creating a 
temporary sense of relaxation to deal with struggles like anxiety, body dysmorphia, and even 
intergenerational trauma, increasing dependence while preserving the underlying 
symptoms—making tobacco a deadly tool for profit in a worsening crisis of youth and adult 
mental health. We urge you to pass HB441 HD2 SD1 and raise the tax by 5 cents per 
cigarette to ensure the increase has a positive impact on public health in Hawai‘i.  
​
​
​
 
Mahalo, 
Coalition for a Tobacco-Free Hawai‘i Youth Council 
 
The CTFH Youth Council is a nationally recognized group of youth leaders fighting to envision and create a Hawaiʻi 
centered on uplifting community public health beyond the reaches of Big Tobacco. Our council comprises middle 
school, high school, and college students, with representation from across Hawaiʻi’s counties.  
1 

 
Hawaii COPD Coalition 
P O Box 240053 
Honolulu, HI  96824 
hicopd@gmail.com 
 (808)699-9839 
 
March 29, 2025 
 
Honorable Chair Senator Donovan Dela Cruz 
Honorable Vice-Chair Senator Sharon Moriwaki 
Members of the Senate Ways and Means 
 
RE:  Support for HB441, HD2, SD1 Relating to Cigarette Taxes, with Amendments 
 
Dear Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki and members of the Senate Ways and Means Committee, 
 
This measure is extremely critical to the health of the children of our state and our entire state as well.  Please 
pass HB441, HD2, SD1 which would raise the cigarette tax but AMEND the tax so that is is increased at least 
$1 instead of $.40. This will help discourage youth use and will use the money collected from the increase for 
the Cancer Research Fund.  Increasing the cigarette tax by at least $1 will result in 2,400 adults who currently 
smoke would quit, 100 young adults aged 18-24 would quit and there would be a 7.4% decrease in youth 
under 18 smoking.  In addition, the projected annual revenue from increasing the cigarette tax by $1.00 per 
pack in Hawaii would be $10.84 million, which would be very helpful to the Cancer Research Center of Hawaii 
in sustaining their critical work! 
 
I am Executive Director of the Hawaii COPD Coalition and serve over 45,000 Hawaii adults diagnosed with 
COPD in Hawaii (with an estimated equal number still undiagnosed). Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
or COPD is an umbrella of diseases which include emphysema, chronic bronchitis and chronic asthma.  Since 
2007, I have worked in Hawaii, nationally and internationally with countless people who have had their lungs 
and lives horribly affected by tobacco and nicotine.  Many of these people have become disabled and unable 
to perform jobs and hobbies they enjoyed, spending a lot more time and resources with healthcare providers 
and requiring support from society than they or any of us would like. 
 
Research shows conclusively that significant price increases reduce tobacco use among youth. Please help 
protect the lungs and lives of our children from cigarettes.  We urge you to please vote in favor of HB441, 
HD2, SD1 WITH RECOMMENDED AMENDMENT and pass it out of committee so our keiki and community 
will be protected via higher tobacco taxes.  The Hawaii COPD Coalition thanks you very much for your careful 
consideration of this most important and timely bill. 
 
Very truly yours, 
Valerie Chang 
Valerie Chang 
Executive Director 

 
 
 
    
 
 
 
Hawai‘i Pacific Health  |  55 Merchant Street  |  Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96813 
Monday, March 31, 2025; 10:02 AM  
Conference Room 211 & Video Conference 
 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
 
To:  
Senator Donovan Dela Cruz, Chair 
        Senator Sharon Moriwaki, Vice Chair 
 
From: Ray Vara 
 
President & CEO 
 
Re: 
Testimony in Support of HB 441, HD2, SD1 
Relating To Cigarette Taxes 
 
 
My name is Ray Vara and I am the President and CEO of Hawai‘i Pacific Health. Hawai‘i 
Pacific Health is a not-for-profit health care system comprised of its four medical centers 
– Kapi‘olani, Pali Momi, Straub and Wilcox and over 70 locations statewide with a mission 
of creating a healthier Hawai‘i. 
 
I write in support of HB 441, HD2, SD1 which amends the cigarette tax and allocates 
the increase in the cigarette tax amount to the Hawai'i Cancer Research special fund. 
The University of Hawai’i Cancer Research Center (Cancer Center) is the only institution 
in the Pacific that holds the prestigious National Cancer Institute (NCI) designation.  The 
Cancer Center is one of only 72 NCI designated institutions in the US.  The NCI 
designation gives the people of Hawai’i and the Pacific region access to innovative and 
potentially life-saving clinical trials without the necessity of traveling to the mainland.  The 
Cancer Center is in a unique position to study and address the multi-ethnic causes of 
cancer and implement culturally tailored interventions and studies aimed at understanding 
and combating cancer in Hawai'i’s diverse population. 
 
The decline in cigarette tax revenue has been due to successful cessation programs in 
which the Cancer Center has been a collaborative partner.  This underscores the need 
for sustained state support to continue these vital efforts.  The declining revenue from the 
cigarette tax which has resulted from declining cigarette sales has had a negative impact 
on the Cancer Center’s ability to maintain the cutting-edge research it is engaged in.  
Unless the Cancer Center can compensate for the loss of revenue and obtain the 
additional funds it will not be in a position to grow its research capacity, attract world-class 
researchers and clinical investigators, address specialized oncology practice shortages, 
attract partnerships for clinical trials, and support its ongoing early phase clinical trials. 
 

 
Page 2 
The incidence of cancer is increasing significantly and could double during the next twenty 
years.  The additional revenue generated by the modest increase in the cigarette tax will 
allow the Cancer Center to continue to provide innovative clinical trials to Hawai’i 
residents to prevent and treat cancer and to ensure the Cancer Center's long-term 
success in addressing cancer-related challenges for patients in Hawaiʻi and the Pacific 
region. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
 

 
 
The mission of The Queen’s Health System is to fulfill the intent of Queen Emma and King Kamehameha IV to provide in 
perpetuity quality health care services to improve the well-being of Native Hawaiians and all of the people of Hawai‘i. 
 
1301 Punchbowl Street      ●     Honolulu, Hawaii 96813      ●      Phone 808-691-5900 
To: 
The Honorable Donovan M. Dela Cruz, Chair 
The Honorable Sharon Moriwaki, Vice Chair 
Members, Senate Committee on Ways and Means  
  
From: Jason Chang, President & CEO, The Queen’s Health Systems 
 
Jacce Mikulanec, Director, Government Relations, The Queen’s Health Systems 
 
Date: March 31, 2025 
 
Re: 
Support for HB441 HD2 SD1: Relating to Cigarette Taxes   
 
 
 
The Queen’s Health Systems (Queen’s) is a nonprofit corporation that provides expanded health 
care capabilities to the people of Hawai‘i and the Pacific Basin. Since the founding of the first 
Queen’s hospital in 1859 by Queen Emma and King Kamehameha IV, it has been our mission to 
provide quality health care services in perpetuity for Native Hawaiians and all of the people of 
Hawai‘i. Over the years, the organization has grown to four hospitals, and more than 10,000 
affiliated physicians, caregivers, and dedicated medical staff statewide.  As the preeminent health 
care system in Hawai‘i, Queen’s strives to provide superior patient care that is constantly 
advancing through education and research. 
 
Queen’s appreciates the opportunity to provide testimony in support of HB441 HD2 SD1, which 
increases the cigarette tax and amends the cigarette tax disposition of revenues by allocating the 
increase in the cigarette tax amount to the Hawaii Cancer Center Research Special Fund.   
 
The Queen’s Medical Center is a long-standing member of the University of Hawaii Cancer 
Consortium, of which members have a common goal to eliminate cancer through research. The 
UH Cancer Center is one of only 72 institutions in the United States that hold the prestigious 
National Cancer Institute (NCI) designation and is the only NCI-designated center in the Pacific.  
The NCI designation provides cancer researchers in Hawaii with greater access to federal 
funding and research opportunities.  More importantly, it gives the people of Hawaii and the 
Pacific region access to many innovative and potentially life-saving clinical trials without the 
necessity of traveling to the mainland.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of this measure.  

 
 
 
Date: March 29, 2025 
  
To:       ​Senator Donovan M. Dela Cruz,, Chair 
Senator Sharon Y. Moriwaki, Vice Chair 
      ​
Members of the Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
 
RE:      ​Support with Amendments for HB 441 HD2 SD1, Relating to Cigarette 
Taxes 
  
Hrg:   ​Monday, March 31, 2025 at 10:02 AM, Room 211 
_________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
The Coalition for a Tobacco-Free Hawai‘i, a program of the Hawai‘i Public Health 
Institute,1 is in support of HB 441 HD2 SD1 with amendments, which would 
increase the cigarette tax to deposit revenue to be payable to the University of 
Hawai‘i for the purpose of debt reduction for the Cancer Research Center of 
Hawai‘i. 
 
We respectfully ask you to consider an amendment to raise the tax on cigarettes by $1 
per pack (or 21 cents per stick) to maximize the bill’s benefit for public health. We 
suggest adopting the bill language from HB 1085.  
 
Raising taxes on cigarettes is a proven strategy to help reduce cigarette use and 
dependence, and can be a benefit for public health when that increase is at the 
rate of $1 per pack.2  Small tax increases do not produce the same public health 
benefit because the tobacco industry can easily offset the beneficial impact of a 
small tax increase with temporary price cuts and coupons. One projected outcome 
with a $1 increase in the cost of a pack of cigarettes would result in approximately 
2,000 adults in our state quitting smoking.2 
 
The burden of tobacco in Hawai‘i. 
Tobacco-related disease continues to be the leading cause of preventable death in 
the United States, resulting in 480,000 deaths annually, with 1,400 of those 
deaths happening each year in Hawai‘i.3  At the population level, 10% of adults in 
Hawai‘i are still smoking cigarettes according to our most recent survey data; ten 
years prior the rate was 14.6%.  Although we’ve seen a decline, health inequities 
still exist, and our Native Hawaiian adult smoking rate is much closer to 20%.4 In 
addition,  tobacco-related diseases cost Hawai‘i $611M in healthcare costs. 
 
Tobacco taxes protect youth. 
When the price of goods increases, price-sensitive youth buy them less. 
The last time Hawaiʻi raised the cigarette tax was over 13 years ago in 
2011, a decline in youth use followed. In 2011, 10% of youth reported 
currently using cigarettes. By 2019, 5% of youth reported currently using 
cigarettes.5 The projected outcome with a $1 increase in the cost of a pack 
707 Richards Street, Suite 300 • Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96813 • hiphi.org 
HIPHI Board 
May Okihiro, MD, MS​
Chair​
John A. Burns School of Medicine, 
Department of Pediatrics 
Titiimaea Ta’ase, JD​
Secretary​
State of Hawai‘i, Deputy Public Defender 
Carissa Holley, MEd​
Treasurer​
Hale Makua Health Services 
Debbie Erskine​
ARCH-MEPS Consulting LLC, Owner 
Camonia Graham - Tutt, PhD​
University of Hawai‘i – West O‘ahu  
Jennifer José Lo, MD​
Hawai‘i Health Partners 
Misty Pacheco, DrPH​
University of Hawai‘i at Hilo 
Kathleen Roche, MS, RN, CENP​
Kaiser Permanente 
Dina Shek, JD​
Medical-Legal Partnership​
For Children in Hawai‘i 
Garret Sugai​
HMSA 
JoAnn Tsark, MPH​
John A. Burns School of Medicine, Native 
Hawaiian Research Office 
HIPHI Initiatives 
Coalition for a​
Tobacco-Free Hawai‘i 
Community-Based Research & 
Evaluation 
Community Health​
Worker Initiatives 
COVID-19 Response 
Environmental Health 
Hawai‘i Drug & Alcohol-Free Coalitions 
Hawai‘i Farm to School Network 
Hawaiʻi Oral Health Coalition 
Hawai‘i Public Health Training Hui 
Healthy Eating + Active Living 
Kūpuna Collective/Healthy Aging & 
Community Living 
Public Health Workforce Development 

 
of cigarettes would be a 7.4% decrease in youth (under 18) smoking, and 100 young adults (18-24) 
would quit smoking.6 
 
A cigarette tax increase is overdue. 
The cigarette tax was last raised in July 2011. Increasing cigarette taxes regularly corrects for 
inflation and consumer purchasing power. Likewise, raising the taxes on other tobacco products 
must be done in tandem to reduce consumption and dependence on tobacco products. This 
increase helps to stop youth from using cigarettes and encourages adults to quit.   
 
According to an independent poll conducted by Ward Research on behalf of the Coalition, 78% of 
registered Hawai‘i voters support an increase in cigarette taxes, and 89% feel that it is important 
for the state to dedicate part of its tobacco tax revenue to support tobacco prevention and 
cessation programs.7 Currently, no revenue from tobacco taxes is appropriated for tobacco 
prevention and cessation.  When the price of tobacco increases, more people seek help to quit and 
we need to ensure programs are available and accessible by the public to help them quit. 
Populations that continue to experience higher rates of smoking would be the primary 
beneficiaries of these prevention and cessation activities, helping to provide resources needed to 
quit smoking and to help cut the high costs associated with tobacco use.  We humbly ask that a 
portion of the proposed tobacco tax revenue be dedicated to supporting tobacco prevention and 
cessation programs. 
 
We applaud the Legislature for helping to strengthen the health of our state by considering this 
measure. The Coalition supports HB 441 HD2 SD1 and asks you to pass this measure out of 
committee with the requested amendments. 
 
 
Mahalo, 
 
 
Kevin Ramirez 
Coalition for a Tobacco-Free Hawai‘i Program Manager 
Hawaiʻi Public Health Institute 
 
 
 
1 The Coalition for a Tobacco-Free Hawai'i (Coalition) is a program of the Hawai'i Public Health Institute (HIPHI) that is 
dedicated to reducing tobacco use through education, policy, and advocacy. With more than two decades of history in 
Hawai'i, the Coalition has led several campaigns on enacting smoke-free environments, including being the first state in 
the nation to prohibit the sale of tobacco and electronic smoking devices to purchasers under 21 years of age. 
 
 
2 Boonn, A., Chaloupka, F. J., & Henkle, D. (2025). (publication). New Revenues, Public Health Benefits & Cost Savings 
From a $1.00 Cigarette Tax Increase in Hawaii.  
 
707 Richards Street, Suite 300 • Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96813 • hiphi.org 

 
3 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023, May 4). Burden of cigarette use in the U.S. Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention. 
https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/campaign/tips/resources/data/cigarette-smoking-in-united-states.html 
 
3 The toll of tobacco in Hawaii. Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids. (2024, August 16). 
https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/problem/toll-us/hawaii  
 
4  Hawaii Health Matters. (2024, February). Hawaii health matters. Hawaii Health Matters :: Indicators :: Adults Who 
Smoke Cigarettes :: State : Hawaii. 
https://www.hawaiihealthmatters.org/indicators/index/view?indicatorId=8&localeId=14&localeChartIdxs=1|6 
 
5  Hawaii Health Matters. (n.d.). Hawaii health matters. Hawaii Health Matters :: Indicators :: Teens Who Smoke 
Cigarettes :: State : Hawaii. 
https://www.hawaiihealthmatters.org/?module=indicators&controller=index&action=view&comparisonId=&indicator
Id=2584&localeTypeId=1&localeId=14&periodId=244 
 
6 Boonn, A., Chaloupka, F. J., & Henkle, D. (2025). (publication). New Revenues, Public Health Benefits & Cost Savings 
From a $1.00 Cigarette Tax Increase in Hawaii.  
 
7 This study by Ward Research, Inc. summarizes findings from a phone survey among n=700 Hawai‘i registered voters 
(maximum sampling error +/- 3.7%), conducted between October 25 to November 22, 2024. 
707 Richards Street, Suite 300 • Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96813 • hiphi.org 

 
Hawaii Medical Association 
1360 South Beretania Street, Suite 200 • Honolulu, Hawaii 96814 
Phone: 808.536.7702 • Fax: 808.528.2376 • hawaiimedicalassociation.org 
 
2025 Hawaii Medical Association Officers 
Elizabeth Ann Ignacio, MD, President • Nadine Tenn-Salle, MD, President Elect • Angela Pratt, MD, Immediate Past President 
Jerris Hedges, MD, Treasurer • Thomas Kosasa, MD, Secretary • Marc Alexander, Executive Director 
 
2025 Hawaii Medical Association Public Policy Coordination Team 
Jerald Garcia, MD, Chair  
Linda Rosehill, JD, Government Relations • Marc Alexander, Executive Director 
 
 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS 
Senator Donovan M Dela Cruz, Chair      
Senator Sharon Y Moriwaki, Vice Chair    
 
Date:   March 31, 2025 
From:  Hawaii Medical Association (HMA) 
Jerald Garcia MD - Chair, HMA Public Policy Committee 
 
RE HB 441 HD2 SD1 Relating to Cigarette Taxes- Cigarette Tax; Hawaiʻi Cancer Research 
Special Fund; Tax Increase; Revenue; Disposition; Debt Reduction 
Position: Support 
  
This measure would beginning 1/1/2026, increase the cigarette tax from sixteen cents to eighteen 
cents and amend the disposition of cigarette tax revenues by allocating the increase in the 
cigarette tax amount for debt reduction for the Cancer Research Center of Hawaiʻi. 
  
Smoking is the number one cause of preventable disease and death worldwide. In Hawaii, 
smoking-related healthcare costs $611 million per year, and smoking causes most lung 
cancers, with nearly 9 out of 10 lung cancers deaths caused by smoking cigarettes or 
secondhand smoke exposure.  
  
State agencies, healthcare professionals, health systems and insurers will continue to 
work together with lawmakers to reduce smoking and the associated cancer burden in 
Hawaii. The UH Cancer Center is an important partner in Hawaii’s progress for 
prevention, diagnosis and treatment of smoking related cancers. Modest increases in tax 
on tobacco products can not only induce some smokers to quit and deter others from 
starting, but also support Hawaii patient counseling, cessation remedies and vital Hawaii 
cancer research. HMA supports this measure that can both reduce the harmful effects of 
smoking in our community and support ongoing cancer initiatives in our state.      
  
Thank you for allowing the Hawaii Medical Association to testify in support of this 
measure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References and Quick Links 
  

 
 
2025 Hawaii Medical Association Officers 
Elizabeth Ann Ignacio, MD, President • Nadine Tenn-Salle, MD, President Elect • Angela Pratt, MD, Immediate Past President 
Jerris Hedges, MD, Treasurer • Thomas Kosasa, MD, Secretary • Marc Alexander, Executive Director 
 
2025 Hawaii Medical Association Public Policy Coordination Team 
Jerald Garcia MD, Chair  
Linda Rosehill, JD, Government Relations • Marc Alexander, Executive Director 
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Smoking and Cancer. 
https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/campaign/tips/diseases/cancer.html   Accessed Jan 25 2025. 
  
American Lung Association. "State of Lung Cancer" report. https://www.lung.org/research/state-of-lung-
cancer/states/hawaii#:~:text=The%20percent%20of%20people%20alive,in%20Hawaii%20improved%20b
y%2029%25. Accessed Jan 25 2025.   
  
Ueno N. Raise tax 2 cents to fund cancer research. Honolulu Star Advertiser Jan 19 2025.  Accessed Jan 
25 2025. 
 

 
American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network | 2370 Nu’uanu Avenue | Honolulu, HI 96817 |fightcancer.org 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Committee on Ways and Means 
Senator Donovan Dela Cruz, Chair 
Senator Sharon Moriwaki, Vice Chair 
 
 
Hearing Date: Monday, March 31, 2025 
 
 
ACS CAN COMMENTS WITH AMENDMENTS HB 441 HD2 SD1 – RELATING TO CIGARETTE 
TAXES. 
Cynthia Au, Government Relations Director – Hawaiʻi Guam  
American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network 
 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to COMMENT WITH AMENDMENTS HB 441 HD2 SD1: Relating to 
Cigarette Taxes.  
 
The American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network (ACS CAN), the nonprofit, non-partisan 
advocacy affiliate of the American Cancer Society advocates for public policies that reduce death 
and suffering from cancer. ACS CAN works with federal, state, and local government bodies to 
support evidence-based policy and legislative solutions designed to eliminate cancer as a major 
health problem. 
 
ACS CAN supports increased funding for the University of Hawaiʻi Cancer Center (UH Cancer 
Center). This year, more than 9,000 residents from Hawaiʻi will be diagnosed with cancer, with 
more than 2,000 residents expected to die from the disease. Projections in 2025 mark an uptick 
in cases, but a decline in deaths compared to 2024.  
 
The UH Cancer Center provides important cancer research, access to life-saving treatment 
including clinical trials which play a critical role in reducing the cancer burden for multi-ethnic 
residents. Sustainability of the National Cancer Institute (NCI) designated UH Cancer Center is 
vital for cancer screening, prevention, treatment, and education, significantly reducing the 
cancer burden in Hawaiʻi and the Pacific. UH Cancer Center is the only NCI-designated cancer 
center in the Pacific and top 4% of all cancer centers in the U.S. 
 	

 
American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network | 2370 Nu’uanu Avenue | Honolulu, HI 96817 |fightcancer.org 
 
2 
 
 
ACS CAN calls on you to increase the amount of the cigarette tax increase contained in this bill 
to a 5 cent per cigarette increase (or a $1.00 per pack of cigarettes increase).  Increasing the tax 
on cigarettes by $1.00 per pack would generate $10.84 million in new annual revenue as well as 
reduce youth smoking by 6.9%, help 2,000 adults who smoke quit, and save 500 lives.  The 
cigarette tax has not increased since 2011. This would allow additional funding for the UH 
Cancer Center while improving the health of our state by reducing tobacco use.   
 
Should you have any questions, please do not hesitate to contact Government Relations Director 
Cynthia Au at Cynthia.Au@Cancer.org or 808.460.6109. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW REVENUES, PUBLIC HEALTH BENEFITS & COST SAVINGS 
FROM A $1.00 CIGARETTE TAX INCREASE IN HAWAII 
 
• 
The current state cigarette tax is $3.20 per pack (8th among all states and DC). 
 
• 
Annual health care expenditures in Hawaii directly caused by tobacco use are $611 million.  
 
 
Projected New Annual Revenue from Increasing the Cigarette Tax by $1.00 Per Pack:  $10.84 million 
New Annual Revenue is the amount of additional new revenue the first full year the tax increase is in effect.  The state will collect less new 
revenue if it fails to apply the rate increase to all cigarettes and other tobacco products held in wholesaler and retailer inventories on the 
effective date.  
 
 
Projected Public Health Benefits for Hawaii from the Cigarette Tax Rate Increase 
Percent decrease in youth (under age 18) smoking: 
6.9% 
Youth under age 18 kept from becoming adults who smoke: 
500 
Reduction in young adults who smoke (18-24 years old): 
100 
Current adults who smoke who would quit: 
2,000 
Premature smoking-caused deaths prevented: 
500 
5-Year reduction in the number of smoking-affected pregnancies and births: 
80 
5-Year health care cost savings from fewer smoking-caused lung cancer cases: 
$360,000 
5-Year health care cost savings from fewer smoking-affected pregnancies and births: 
$190,000 
5-Year health care cost savings from fewer smoking-caused heart attacks & strokes: 
$220,000 
5-Year Medicaid program savings for the state: 
$990,000 
Long-term health care cost savings from adult & youth smoking declines: 
$31.80 million 
12.24.24 ACS CAN / January 24, 2025 
 
• Small tax increase amounts do not produce significant public health benefits or cost savings because the cigarette 
companies can easily offset the beneficial impact of such small increases with temporary price cuts, coupons, and 
other promotional discounting.  Splitting a tax rate increase into separate, smaller increases in successive years will 
similarly diminish or eliminate the public health benefits and related cost savings (as well as reduce the amount of 
new revenue). 
• Raising state tax rates on other tobacco products (OTPs), including e-cigarettes, to parallel the increased cigarette 
tax rate will bring the state additional revenue, public health benefits, and cost savings (and promote tax equity).  
With unequal rates, the state loses revenue each time someone who smokes cigarettes switches to other tobacco 
products taxed at a lower rate.  To parallel the new $4.20 per pack cigarette tax, the state’s new OTP tax rate 
should be a percentage of the wholesale price with minimum tax rates for each major OTP category linked to the 
state cigarette tax rate on a per-package or per-dose basis. 
 
 

 
Explanations & Notes 
 
Health care costs listed at the top of the page are from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).  Annual 
health care expenditures in Hawaii directly caused by tobacco use are in 2018 dollars and are based on the CDC’s 2014 
Best Practices for Comprehensive Tobacco Control Programs. 
 
Projections are based on research findings that nationally, each 10% increase in the retail price of cigarettes reduces youth 
smoking by 6.5%, young adult prevalence by 3.25%, adult prevalence by 2%, and total cigarette consumption by about 4% 
(adjusted down to account for tax evasion effects).  However, the impact of the tax increase varies from state-to-state, 
based on the starting pack price.  Significant tax increases generate new revenues because the higher tax rate per pack 
brings in more new revenue than is lost from the tax-related drop in total pack sales. 
 
The projections also incorporate the effect of ongoing background smoking declines, population distribution, and the 
continued impact of any industry pricing changes, state cigarette tax increases, or other changes in cigarette tax policies on 
prices, smoking levels, and pack sales. 
 
These projections are fiscally conservative because they include a generous adjustment for lost state pack sales (and lower 
net new revenues) from possible new smuggling and tax evasion after the rate increase and from fewer sales to people 
who smoke or smugglers from other states, including sales on tribal lands.  For ways that the state can protect and 
increase its tobacco tax revenues and prevent and reduce contraband trafficking and other tobacco tax evasion, see the 
Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids (CTFK) factsheet, State Options to Prevent and Reduce Cigarette Smuggling and to 
Block Other Illegal State Tobacco Tax Evasion, https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/assets/factsheets/0274.pdf. 
 
Projected numbers of youth prevented from smoking and dying are based on all youth ages 17 and under alive today.  
Projected reduction in young adults who smoke refers to young adults ages 18-24 who would not start smoking or would 
quit as a result of the tax increase.  Savings to state Medicaid programs include estimated changes in enrollment due to the 
expiration of pandemic-related federal legislation prohibiting states from removing enrollees.  Long-term cost savings 
accrue over the lifetimes of persons who stop smoking or never start because of the tax rate increase.  All cost savings are 
in 2025 dollars. 
 
Projections for cigarette tax increases much higher than $1.00 per pack are limited, especially for states with relatively low 
current tax rates, because of the lack of research on the effects of larger cigarette tax increase amounts on consumption 
and prevalence.  Projections for cigarette tax increases much lower than $1.00 per pack are also limited because small tax 
increases are unlikely to produce significant public health benefits. 
 
Ongoing reductions in state smoking rates will, over time, gradually erode state cigarette tax revenues, in the absence of 
any new rate increases.  However, those declines are more predictable and less volatile than many other state revenue 
sources, such as state income tax or corporate tax revenues, which can drop sharply during recessions.  In addition, the 
smoking declines that reduce tobacco tax revenues will simultaneously produce much larger reductions in government and 
private sector smoking-caused health care and other costs over time.  See the CTFK factsheet, Tobacco Tax Increases are 
a Reliable Source of Substantial New State Revenue, https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/assets/factsheets/0303.pdf. 
 
The projections in the table on this fact sheet were generated using an economic model developed jointly by Economics for 
Health, the Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids, the American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network, and are updated 
annually.  The projections are based on economic modeling by researchers with Economics for Health:  Frank Chaloupka, 
Ph.D., and John Tauras, Ph.D., at the Institute for Health Research and Policy at the University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Jidong Huang, Ph.D., at Georgia State University, and Michael Pesko, Ph.D., at the University of Missouri.  The state 
Medicaid cost savings projections, when available, are based on enrollment and cost estimates by Elizabeth Zhang and 
Gideon Lukens at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities using data from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services. 
 
For other ways states can increase revenues (and promote public health) beyond just raising cigarette tax rates, see the 
CTFK factsheet, The Many Ways States Can Raise Revenue While Also Reducing Tobacco Use and Its Many Harms & 
Costs, https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/assets/factsheets/0357.pdf. 
 
Additional information and resources to support tobacco tax increases are available at: 
https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/what-we-do/us/state-tobacco-taxes/fact-sheets 
http://fightcancer.org/tobacco/taxes/ 
https://www.economicsforhealth.org/ 
 
For more on sources and calculations, see https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/assets/factsheets/0281.pdf or 
https://www.fightcancer.org/policy-resources/state-tobacco-tax-increases-explanations-and-sources-projections-
new-revenues. 
 
Ann Boonn, Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids 
Frank J. Chaloupka, Economics for Health 
Deanna Henkle, American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network 

 
American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network | 655 15th Street, NW, Suite 503 | Washington, DC 20005 
     @ACSCAN |       @ACSCAN | fightcancer.org 
 
©2023, American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Cigarette Tax Increases That Deliver: $1.00 or More 
Per Pack are Needed to Ensure a Public Health Impact 
The American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network (ACS CAN) supports a comprehensive approach to 
tobacco control that includes significantly increasing excise taxes on all forms of tobacco. Regular, 
significant excise tax increases of $1.00 or more per pack of cigarettes are one of the most effective ways to 
prevent kids from starting to use cigarettes and to help adults quit. Tobacco excise taxes can also reduce 
tobacco-related health disparities among people with limited incomes, pregnant persons and among racial 
and ethnic populations.i,ii,iii  
 
To Discourage Cigarette Use Excise Tax Increases Must be High Enough to 
Impact Price  
In order for cigarette excise tax increases to help people quit and prevent youth from ever starting the 
increases must be large enough to significantly impact the price of cigarettes for consumers. While cigarette 
excise tax increases of smaller amounts may generate small amounts of additional revenue, they fail to 
significantly reduce tobacco use. 
 
The Tobacco Industry Uses Coupons and Discounts to Actively Undermines 
Excise Tax Increases  
The goal of tobacco companies is to protect profits by getting and keeping people addicted to tobacco.iv  
Significant increases to cigarette excise taxes run counter to this goal. Therefore, when cigarette excise 
taxes are increased, major tobacco companies flood the market with coupons and discounts, such as “buy-
one-get-one-free” offers, to keep the overall cost of tobacco products low discourage consumers from 
quitting. In fact, the tobacco industry now spends most of its marketing dollars on price-reducing tactics 
known to be most appealing to individuals with limited-income and other price-sensitive individuals, like 
kids.v  
Annual Price-Related Cigarette Marketing Dollars and Percent of Total Cigarette 
Marketing Dollars Spent by Manufacturers Over the Past 24 Years 
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
$0.0
$5.0
$10.0
$15.0
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Billions
Price-Related Cigarette Marketing Dollars (Coupons, Price Discounts & Promotional Allowances)
Percent of Total Cigarette Marketing Dollars

Cigarette Tax Increases of $1.00+ Per Pack Ensure Public Health Impact   I  July 2023 
 
American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network | 655 15th Street, NW, Suite 503 | Washington, DC 20005 
     @ACSCAN |       @ACSCAN | fightcancer.org 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         Updated 7.07.23 
-2- 
©2023, American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network, Inc. 
 
 
Significant excise tax increases of at least $1.00 or more 
per pack of cigarettes are needed to prevent these 
price-reducing tactics and achieve the public health 
goal of reducing tobacco use. Cigarette excise tax 
increases of less than $1.00 per pack allow the industry 
to easily offset any price hikes with coupons, discounts, 
and other price-lowering sales promotions.  
 
In the last 24 years, the percent of total cigarette 
marketing dollars spent by the industry on all its price-
reducing tactics has grown significantly. In fact, in 2021 
the two largest spending categories for cigarette 
marketing were retail and wholesale price discounts – 
despite the total number of cigarettes sold reducing by 
6.7% in 2021 from 2020. Payments to retailers and 
wholesalers for price discounts and promotional 
allowances combined totaled $7.65 billion, or 94.9% of 
all cigarette marketing dollars in 2021.vi Tobacco manufacturers continue to rely heavily on price-reducing 
tactics to not only undermine tobacco excise tax increases, but research has shown these strategies also 
encourage smoking initiation and hinder smoking cessation attempts.vii,viii 
 
ACS CAN’s Position 
Increases in cigarette excise taxes of at least $1.00 per pack will ensure a public health impact of reducing 
tobacco use is achieved, despite industry attempts to offset price increases and keep prices low. Increases 
higher than $1.00 per pack can deliver health and revenue benefits for the state. ACS CAN recommends 
directing new tobacco excise tax revenues to fund fact-based tobacco prevention and cessation programs 
to further amplify the public health benefits of the excise tax increase. Lastly, there should be tax parity for 
all tobacco products, including e-cigarettes, pipe tobacco, cigars, snus, hookah and all other smokeless 
tobacco products. 
 
 
i The Community Guide. Tobacco Use: Interventions to Increase the Unite Price for Tobacco Products. November 2012. Retrieved from 
https://www.thecommunityguide.org/findings/tobacco-use-interventions-increase-unit-price-tobacco.  
ii Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Response to increases in cigarette prices by race/ethnicity, income, and age groups--United States, 1976-1993. MMWR 
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 1998 Jul 31;47(29):605-9. PMID: 9699809. 
iii Ringel, J.S., and Evans, W.  “Cigarette Taxes and Smoking During Pregnancy,” Am J Public Health, 2001 November; 91(11): 1851–1856. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1446890/.   
iv For a review of how tobacco companies view the corporate impact of cigarette tax increases, see: Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids: “Raising Cigarette Taxes Reduces 
Smoking, Especially Among Kids (and the Cigarette Companies Know it).  Updated March 15, 2021.  https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/assets/factsheets/0146.pdf.   
v Regarding the effect of price discounts on population segments, see: Xu, X., Wang, X., Caraballo, R.  “Is Every Smoker Interested in Price Promotions?  An Evaluation of Price-
Related Discounts by Cigarette Brands,” J Public Health Management Practice, 2016, 22(1), 20–28. 
vi U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC), Cigarette Report for 2021, January 2023, https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/ftc_gov/pdf/p114508cigarettereport2021.pdf  [data for 
top 4 manufacturers only: Altria Group, Inc.; ITG Holdings USA Inc.; Reynolds American, Inc.; and Vector Group Ltd.]. 
vii Wang Y, Duan Z, Weaver SR, Self-Brown SR, Ashley DL, Emery SL, Huang J. The Short-Term and Long-Term Associations Between Receiving Tobacco Discounts or Coupons 
and Smoking Cessation Among U.S. Adult Cigarette Smokers With Intention to Quit. Nicotine Tob Res. 2023 Mar 22;25(4):699-708. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntac216. PMID: 36124654; 
PMCID: PMC10032185. 
viii Liber AC, Sánchez-Romero LM, Cadham CJ, Yuan Z, Li Y, Oh H, Cook S, Warner KE, Henriksen L, Mistry R, Meza R, Fleischer NL, Levy DT. Tobacco Couponing: A Systematic 
Review of Exposures and Effects on Tobacco Initiation and Cessation. Nicotine Tob Res. 2022 Oct 17;24(10):1523-1533. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntac037. PMID: 35143678; PMCID: 
PMC9575981. 

HB-441-SD-1 
Submitted on: 3/28/2025 5:25:39 PM 
Testimony for WAM on 3/31/2025 10:02:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
William L. Goo 
Testifying for Cigar 
Association of America 
Oppose 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Oppose. 
 

HB-441-SD-1 
Submitted on: 3/28/2025 8:42:19 PM 
Testimony for WAM on 3/31/2025 10:02:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Lynn Murakami 
Akatsuka 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I strongly support HB 441, HD 2, SD 1 that would increase the cigarette tax from $0.16 to $0.18 
per cigarette. With the reduction of cigarette tax allocation to the UH Cancer Center with the 
success of smoking cessation efforts; this bill's cigarette tax increase would restore funding that 
would expand cancer research, to provide and fund clinical trials for residents and patients in 
Hawai'i, Asia, and our Pacific Island neighbors as well as advancing disease prevention and 
community outreach. 
We are very fortunate to have a National Cancer Institute-designated cancer center in Hawai'i. It 
is accessible for all to get the care, clinical trials, evidence-based interventions, and the hope to 
survive with family and friends nearby. The cost of going to the mainland, if our UH Cancer 
Center was not here, for these types of services would be a financial hardship and a barrier to 
pursue cancer interventions. 
Thus, I strongly support HB 441, HD 2, SD 1 passage this legislative session. It is the right thing 
to do. Cancer has touched our lives whether it's been a family member, friend or colleague. 
Please support the UH Cancer Center's continued funding to do what the cigarette tax fund’s 
inception started in 2006 for Hawai'i. 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit my testimony. 
 

HB-441-SD-1 
Submitted on: 3/28/2025 11:25:18 PM 
Testimony for WAM on 3/31/2025 10:02:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
B.A. McClintock 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Please support this bill. Mahalo.  
 

March 31, 2025 
 
Aloha Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki, and members of the Senate Committee on Ways and Means. 
Mahalo for this opportunity to submit testimony in support of the intent of HB 441, HD2, SD1 Relating to 
Taxation, but urging an amendment to increase the proposed tax amount to $1.00 per pack, or 5-cents per 
stick, to fully recognize the health benefits of such a tax increase. 
 
Tobacco taxes have long been proven as an effective way to reduce tobacco consumption, especially 
among price sensitive young people and people from lower income populations. 
 
Because smoking levels are highest among people with low incomes, the cigarette companies have tried 
to argue against tobacco taxes as regressive and falling disproportionately hard on lower-income families 
and communities.  But this argument turns reality upside down.  The fact that smoking rates are highest 
among lower-income groups means that lower-income families and communities currently suffer the most 
from tobacco use and will, consequently, benefit the most from any effective new measures to reduce 
tobacco consumption, including increased state tobacco taxes.  
 
While tobacco tax increases that raise cigarette prices prevent and reduce smoking among all income 
groups, they work most powerfully to prompt lower-income smokers to quit or cutback, and to stop 
lower-income kids from ever starting. As a result, low-income families and communities will not be the 
victims of a cigarette tax increase but its biggest beneficiaries. 
 
The cigarette companies’ regressivity argument fails to account for each of the following facts. 
 
• 
Increases to state tobacco tax rates will not place any new financial burdens of any kind on the 90 
percent of Hawaii adults who neither smoke cigarettes nor buy them.   
 
• 
While new cigarette tax increases will raise cigarette prices, many current smokers will avoid the 
higher prices by quitting or cutting back on consumption and lower-income smokers are much more 
likely than higher-income smokers to quit or cut back in response to price increases. In fact, all of the 
smokers who quit and many of those who cut back because of cigarette tax increases would actually 
save money by spending less on cigarettes and to instead invest their dollars on products that 
potentially can benefit them and their families’ health and welfare.   
 
• 
Those who stop smoking in response to cigarette tax increases would greatly improve their own 
health, which could also significantly reduce their healthcare costs.  Because of their higher rate of 
illness and disability, smokers have substantially higher annual and lifetime healthcare costs than 
nonsmokers or former smokers (despite living shorter lives). According to the Hawaii Department of 
Health, smoking-related health care expenditures total more than $209,957 per Hawaii smoker. 
Smoking rate declines resulting from a $1 per pack state cigarette tax increase would directly reduce 
these tobacco-caused tax burdens. 
 
• 
Any significant state cigarette tax increase also would bring in millions of dollars per year in new 
government revenues, thereby reducing pressures for other, broader-based tax increases and possibly 
even making broad-based tax cuts more likely.  Cigarette tax increases are also often used as an 
alternative to cuts to the funding of state government programs that serve low-income communities. 
 
• 
The smoking declines produced by cigarette tax increases save lives, reduce human suffering, 
promote the public health, and prevent more kids from becoming addicted to smoking or ultimately 
dying from it – and these results are disproportionately experienced among low-income persons, 

families, and communities.   
 
• 
Low-income smokers and their communities would also disproportionately benefit if any of the new 
revenues from cigarette tax increases were directed to new programs to help people quit smoking and 
prevent kids from starting – both because smoking is more prevalent among low-income persons and 
because lower-income persons currently have much less access or exposure to any such programs 
than people with higher incomes. 
  
Cigarette companies say that they oppose higher cigarette taxes because they care about low-income 
families and the poor.  But these are the same companies that have been preying on low-income and poor 
communities for decades.  The companies' efforts to “protect” low-income smokers from higher cigarette 
taxes is not only patronizing but a self-serving smokescreen designed to protect cigarette company profits 
and continue smoking-caused costs and harms.  
 
Opposing arguments will be made that an increase in the cigarette tax will negatively impact state 
revenue. However, according to the Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids, annual health care costs to Hawaii 
directly caused by smoking totals $611 million. Annual Medicaid costs to Hawaii caused by smoking 
amounts to $152.3 million. Hawaii residents' state & federal tax burden from smoking-caused government 
expenditures totals $955 per person annually. And smoking-caused productivity losses in Hawaii are $1.1 
billion. These amounts do not include health costs caused by exposure to secondhand smoke, smoking-
caused fires, or use of non-cigarette tobacco products. Productivity losses are from smoking-caused 
premature death and illness that prevent people from working. Tobacco use also imposes costs such as 
damage to property. Clearly, cigarette tax revenue ($64,013,496 in 2024) pales in comparison to the cost 
of tobacco use to Hawaii.  
 
Finally, the Hawaii legislature last increased Hawaii’s cigarette tax in 2006, staggering its implementation 
over five years (a stipulation that favored tobacco companies which allowed them to offset the impact of 
the tax by offering discount coupons to consumers. The staggered implementation also weakened the 
potential positive health impact by keeping cigarettes more affordable to existing users, as well as to new 
potential young users targeted by the companies). Since that time, inflation has decreased significantly not 
only the value of the cigarette tax in terms of tax revenue value, but particularly in terms of its positive 
health impact.  It’s time to boost cigarette taxes by a minimum of $1.00 per pack (the lowest amount 
determined by economic experts to have a meaningful health impact by making it difficult for tobacco 
companies to dull that health impact through the short-term use of discount offers) to again benefit from 
the consumption reduction and health benefits for which the tax is intended. 
 
I urge you to support HB 441, HD 2, SD1, but to amend the bill by increasing the tax by a minimum one-
time $1.00 per pack (5 cents per stick). 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Don Weisman 
Kailua, HI 

 
 
HB 441 HD2 SD1 Relating to Cigarette Taxation 
 
 
To: Senate WAM Committee: 
 
I am submitting this testimony in support of HB 441 HD2 SD1 as a  
long-time Kauai pediatrician concerned with the health of the 
Hawaii population, both children and adults. There is ample 
research concerning the benefit of increasing cigarette taxes. The 
research supports the fact that the larger the tax increase, the 
greater the benefit will accrue related to cigarette use, both short 
and long term improved health, decreased state health costs, and 
increase in state revenue. An increase of $1.00 per pack will 
generate $11.46 million per annum and a long-term savings in 
health care expenses of $611 million. The projected decrease in 
youth cigarette smoking by increasing cigarette taxes to $1/ pack is 
7.4%. 
 
I am encouraged that the State Legislature is attacking the problem 
of tobacco use by using this taxation tool.  It has proven to be quite 
successful in the past on Kauai. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
Linda Weiner, MD 
Kauai 

HB-441-SD-1 
Submitted on: 3/29/2025 11:06:38 AM 
Testimony for WAM on 3/31/2025 10:02:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Bryan Mih 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha, 
My name is Bryan Mih and I am a parent, pediatrician, and the medical director of the 
Kapi’olani Smokefree Families Program.   For the health of our keiki and their families, it is 
vitally important to support HB441. This bill increases the cigarette tax and supports the Cancer 
Research Special Fund. 
The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) strongly supports regulation and taxation of 
tobacco and nicotine products to prevent initiation of use, especially by young people.  These 
policies make tobacco and nicotine products less accessible and affordable.  Here is an excerpt 
from the AAP Policy Statement “Protecting Children and Adolescents From Tobacco and 
Nicotine” Pediatrics (2023) 151 (5): e2023061804. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2023-061804 : 
“…increasing the price of all tobacco products is one of the most effective methods to prevent or 
reduce tobacco use.  Youth are particularly sensitive to tobacco product price increases, with 
research suggesting that youth and young adults are 2 to 3 times as responsive to changes in 
price compared with adults. Increasing excise taxes on tobacco products is especially effective in 
discouraging initiation among young people who have not developed tobacco use disorder, thus 
protecting their health and increasing their likelihood of remaining tobacco-free.  Increasing the 
tobacco tax has the benefit of both raising the price and providing a source of funds that can be 
used for tobacco control programs, helping states capture health care–related cost savings from 
reductions in associated financial costs from death and disease because of tobacco use.” 
Nicotine is a highly addictive drug that impacts the adolescent brain, reducing impulse control 
and affecting mood.  Once young people are addicted to nicotine, it is extremely difficult to 
quit.  Many studies have shown that increased cigarette prices lead to fewer youth smokers and 
decreased health costs overall. 
Finally, it is critical to support the amendments to this bill that increase the tax by at least $1.00 
per pack, which would provide clear benefits in further reducing youth initiation of smoking. 
Please support this important measure with the requested amendment. Mahalo for your 
consideration. 
  

Sincerely, 
Bryan Mih, MD MPH FAAP 
Pediatrician 
Medical Director, Kapi’olani Smokefree Families 
 

HB-441-SD-1 
Submitted on: 3/29/2025 4:47:32 PM 
Testimony for WAM on 3/31/2025 10:02:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Colleen Fox 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Please support with an admendment to increase the tax to $1.00 per pack or 5 cents per cigaratte 
so it will have help prevent and reduce smoking. 
 

HB-441-SD-1 
Submitted on: 3/29/2025 7:41:33 PM 
Testimony for WAM on 3/31/2025 10:02:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Andrew Lum 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki, and Members of the Committee, 
My name is Andrew Lum, and I am the Director of Fiscal Administration at the University of 
Hawaiʻi Cancer Center. I submit this testimony as an individual and not as a representative of the 
University of Hawaiʻi or the UH Cancer Center. 
I strongly support HB441 HD2 SD1 because this bill is about saving lives and ensuring that 
tobacco-related disease research and prevention receive the funding they desperately need. 
Hawaiʻi has not increased its cigarette tax since 2011—14 years ago. In that time, the cost of 
healthcare, research, and education has risen dramatically, but funding for the University of 
Hawaiʻi Cancer Center has not kept pace. Right now, only two cents from every cigarette sold 
goes to the Cancer Center, and due to inflation, those two cents are worth significantly less today 
than they were in 2011. 
At the same time, tobacco continues to take a devastating toll on our ʻohana. Native Hawaiians 
and Pacific Islanders suffer from some of the highest smoking-related cancer rates in the country. 
The tobacco industry continues to target our most vulnerable communities, profiting off 
addiction and disease. 
Raising the cigarette tax is one of the most effective ways to reduce smoking, particularly among 
youth and those who want to quit. Research shows that when prices increase, smoking rates drop, 
leading to fewer cases of cancer and premature deaths. 
HB441 HD2 SD1 does more than discourage smoking—it funds critical cancer research and 
prevention efforts at the University of Hawaiʻi Cancer Center. With additional resources, we can 
work toward a future where fewer families have to experience the pain of losing a loved one to 
tobacco-related diseases. 
It has been 14 years since we last took action on this issue. We cannot afford to wait any longer. 
I urge you to pass HB441 HD2 SD1 and ensure that we are doing everything we can to protect 
the health of our people. 
Mahalo for your time and consideration. 

 

HB-441-SD-1 
Submitted on: 3/30/2025 7:06:56 AM 
Testimony for WAM on 3/31/2025 10:02:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Michael Ching, MD, 
MPH, FAAP 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
As a pediatrician committed to protecting children from the harms of smoking, I support this bill 
with an amendment to increase the cigarette tax by at least $1 per pack. 
Raising the cigarette tax by at least $1 per pack is a proven strategy to reduce tobacco use. This 
increase would lead to: 
• 
2,000 adults quitting smoking 
• 
100 young adults (ages 18–24) quitting 
• 
A 6.9% decrease in youth smoking (under 18) 
• 
$31.8 million in long-term healthcare cost savings from reduced smoking rates 
Additionally, the projected annual revenue from this tax increase in Hawai‘i would be $10.84 
million. 
 

Luke Itomura 
 
March 31, 2025 
 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
 
Testimony in Strong Support of HB441 with Amendments 
 
Aloha Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki, and members of the Committee on Ways and 
Means, 
My name is Luke Itomura, and I am a sophomore at Punahou School. I am submitting 
testimony in strong support of HB441 HD2 with amendments to increase the cigarette tax by 
at least $1.00 per pack. This increase is a proven and effective public health strategy to reduce 
tobacco use and protect the health of Hawai‘i residents. 
Research has consistently shown that smaller tax increases fail to create the significant 
behavioral changes needed to reduce smoking rates. A $1.00 increase, however, would have a 
measurable impact, leading to: 
●​ 2,000 adults who currently smoke quitting 
●​ 100 young adults (ages 18-24) quitting 
●​ A 6.9% decrease in youth under 18 who smoke 
●​ $31.8 million in long-term healthcare cost savings 
Tobacco use remains the leading cause of preventable death in Hawai‘i, contributing to 
chronic illnesses such as heart disease, cancer, and respiratory conditions. By raising the 
cigarette tax by at least $1.00 per pack, we can discourage youth initiation, support adults in 
quitting, and ultimately reduce the burden of tobacco-related diseases on our communities. 
This policy change is not just about increasing revenue—it is about saving lives and 
improving public health. 1,400 people die of a tobacco-related illness each year in Hawaiʻi, and 
this bill presents an opportunity to decrease that number by implementing an evidence-based 
strategy that will yield long-term health benefits for our communities. 
I urge the committees to support HB441 HD2 with an amendment to increase the 
cigarette tax by $1.00 per pack. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Mahalo,  
Luke Itomura 

HB-441-SD-1 
Submitted on: 3/30/2025 9:52:12 AM 
Testimony for WAM on 3/31/2025 10:02:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
thomas wills  
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Date:     March 30, 2025 
From: Thomas A. Wills 
Re:     Strong Support of HB 441, HD2 , SD1 Relating to Cigarette Taxes 
I strongly support HB441, HD2, SD1 which would increase the tax on cigarettes. 
I am a faculty member in the Cancer Prevention in the Pacific Program at the University of 
Hawaii Cancer Center. I have been doing research for over 10 years on cigarette smoking among 
adolescents and adults in Hawaii. I am testifying as an individual. 
I support this bill because of findings from our research on Hawaii adolescents and adults, 
conducted over the past 10 years. Studies have shown that cigarette smoking is still prevalent in 
the Hawaii population, even at younger ages. A clear message from our research is that many 
persons are susceptible to cigarette smoking. This may occur because of family use, friends use, 
and tobacco company advertising. Once a  person starts smoking cigarettes, they are unlikely to 
quit anytime soon because of the addictiveness of nicotine. Continued smoking through 
adulthood places them at risk for heart disease and cancer. 
Moreover, our research has shown that both e-cigarette use and cigarette smoking are related to a 
higher likelihood of respiratory disease (asthma and COPD) among Hawaii adolescents and 
adults. This has been reported in several scientific journals, including Preventive Medicine, Drug 
and Alcohol Dependence, and Public Library of Science. These findings have been confirmed in 
a number of independent studies conducted in Asia and the US. Recent evidence reported in the 
Surgeon General’s Report and the New England Journal of Medicine shows that cigarette 
smoking is linked to several adverse health consequences, including heart disease and cancer. 
Because of our research showing multiple on adverse consequences related to cigarette smoking 
and ethnic differences in rates of smoking (with Native Hawaiians particularly elevated), I urge 
the Legislature to increase the tax on cigarettes so as to encourage further research on cigarette 
smoking in Hawaii. Increasing the price is a proven strategy that discourages access to these 
products. In order to find improved ways of preventing smoking initiation and increasing 
smoking cessation, the increase in the cigarette tax amount should be allocated to the Hawaii 
Cancer Research Special Fund. 

I strongly support HB 441, HD2, SD1 and urge you to approve this bill. 
(s) 
Thomas Wills 
 

HB-441-SD-1 
Submitted on: 3/30/2025 8:11:46 PM 
Testimony for WAM on 3/31/2025 10:02:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Elliot Miles 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
A two-cent increase doesn't seem to be enough. Make it a dollar at least. Do the same for 
alcohol. 
 
 	

HB-441-SD-1 
Submitted on: 3/31/2025 4:00:49 AM 
Testimony for WAM on 3/31/2025 10:02:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Josh Fowler 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Chair, Vice Chair, and Members of the Committee: 
  
I write in strong support of HB441 SD1, which increases the cigarette tax and directs much-
needed funding to the Hawaii Cancer Research Center. The Center is a vital part of our public 
health infrastructure, especially for Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander populations who 
experience higher cancer rates and worse outcomes. 
  
However, I urge the committee to consider a stronger and more effective step: a $1 increase per 
pack, not just 2 cents per cigarette. This would: 
  
Further reduce smoking, especially among youth, 
  
Generate significantly more funding for cancer research and debt reduction, and 
  
Align Hawaii with other leading states in tobacco control policy. 
  
  
Every dollar spent preventing cancer today saves many more in treatment and loss of life 
tomorrow. 
  
 	

Mahalo for your consideration. 
 
