TESTIMONY OF 
THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL 
KA ‘OIHANA O KA LOIO KUHINA 
THIRTY-THIRD LEGISLATURE, 2025 
 
 
ON THE FOLLOWING MEASURE: 
H.B. NO. 302, RELATING TO CANNABIS. 
 
BEFORE THE: 
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH 
 
DATE: 
Wednesday, January 29, 2025 
TIME:  10:00 a.m. 
LOCATION: State Capitol, Room 329 
TESTIFIER(S): 
Anne E. Lopez, Attorney General, or  
Andrew Goff, Deputy Attorney General 
 
 
Chair Takayama and Members of the Committee:
The Department of the Attorney General (Department) offers the following 
comments. 
The purposes of the bill are to: (1) remove the requirement that prospective 
medical cannabis patients meet in person with a physician or advanced practice 
registered nurse prior to being certified for the medical use of cannabis; and (2) allow 
applicants or the primary caregiver of applicants to purchase medical cannabis prior to 
approval by the Department of Health (DOH). 
The Department is concerned that allowing applicants for the medical use of 
cannabis to purchase cannabis before the DOH approves their application could expose 
ineligible individuals to liability.  Legal protections under Hawaii’s medical cannabis 
laws, as outlined in section 329-125, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS), apply only to 
medical cannabis patients who strictly comply with these laws, even if the individual 
mistakenly believed they were compliant with the law. 
Under the proposed bill, an applicant could purchase and possess up to two 
ounces of usable cannabis before the DOH has determined their eligibility for medical 
use.  If the application is denied, the applicant may already possess cannabis without 
legal authorization.  If that occurs, then the person's possession of the cannabis would 
be a violation of law, and the bill makes no provision for what happens to that illegally 
possessed cannabis.  We strongly recommend that the bill clarify what happens to the 

Testimony of the Department of the Attorney General 
Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 
Page 2 of 2 
 
applicant and the cannabis if the application is denied or otherwise recommend deleting 
the authorization for an applicant or primary caregiver to purchase cannabis prior to 
DOH approval found on page 4, lines 5-15. 
Additionally, we note that removing the in-person medical consultation 
requirement for certification for the medical use of cannabis (page 4, lines 1-5, and page 
5, lines 3-4) would conflict with the existing telehealth law.  Section 453-1.3(c), HRS, 
explicitly states:  “For the purposes of . . . certifying a patient for the medical use of 
cannabis, a physician-patient relationship shall only be established after an in-person 
consultation between the prescribing physician and the patient.”  This conflict raises 
legal and regulatory concerns regarding the proper establishment of physician-patient 
relationships for certification for the medical use of cannabis. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments. 

 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAII 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 
P. O. Box 3378 
Honolulu, HI  96801-3378 
doh.testimony@doh.hawaii.gov 
 
 
 
 
Testimony COMMENTING on  HB302 
RELATING TO CANNABIS 
REP. GREGG TAKAYAMA, CHAIR 
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH 
 
Hearing Date:  January 29, 2025 
Room Number:  329 
 
Department Testimony:  The Department of Health (DOH) appreciates the intent of HB302 to 
1 
reduce barriers to accessing medical cannabis and recommends conforming amendments to do so 
2 
more safely.  
3 
 
4 
DOH notes that repealing the requirement for an in-person consultation with a healthcare 
5 
provider to obtain a certification for medical cannabis conflicts with section 453-1.3(c), Hawaii 
6 
Revised Statutes (HRS), which explicitly requires an in-person consultation and would need 
7 
revision.  DOH also notes that authorizing online consultations may open access to Hawaii 
8 
patients to mainland-based telehealth companies, some of which have been under scrutiny in 
9 
other states for questionable practices, and recommends amending chapter 329, HRS, the 
10 
Uniform Controlled Substances Act, to limit prescriptions, or in the case of medical cannabis 
11 
certifications, to those that “shall originate from within the State.” 
12 
Given that the current processing time for a complete application is 2–3 business days, DOH has 
13 
concern that authorizing purchases of medical cannabis prior to the approval of their application 
14 
will cause more potential harm than benefit.  Unintended consequences may include: 
15 
• Exposing a subset of patients to arrest for possession of a controlled substance without a 
16 
physical medical cannabis card;  
17 
• Leading to purchases over the legal limit if an approved patient without a card makes 
18 
purchases from different dispensaries; and  
19 
JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR OF HAWAIʻI 
KE KIAʻĀINA O KA MOKUʻĀINA ʻO HAWAIʻI 
KENNETH S. FINK, M.D., M.G.A., M.P.H. 
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH 
KA LUNA HOʻOKELE 

HB302 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 
• Creating inaccuracies in inventory control systems at dispensaries since sales records are 
1 
based on the unique patient program registration number, which is provided on the card. 
2 
The Department respectfully requests that this provision be omitted. 
3 
 
4 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
5 
Proposed Amendments: 
6 
SECTION 2.  Section 329-123, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is 
7 
amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows: 
8 
"(a)  Physicians or advanced practice registered nurses who 
9 
issue written certifications shall provide, in each written 
10 
certification, the name, address, patient identification number, 
11 
and other identifying information of the qualifying 
12 
patient.  The department of health shall require, in rules 
13 
adopted pursuant to chapter 91, that all written certifications 
14 
comply with a designated form completed by or on behalf of a 
15 
qualifying patient.  The form shall require information from the 
16 
applicant, primary caregiver, and physician or advanced practice 
17 
registered nurse as specifically required or permitted by this 
18 
chapter.  The form shall require the address of the location 
19 
where the cannabis is grown and shall appear on the registry 
20 
card issued by the department of health.  The certifying 
21 

HB302 
Page 3 of 4 
 
 
physician or advanced practice registered nurse shall be 
1 
required to have a bona fide physician-patient relationship or 
2 
bona fide advanced practice registered nurse-patient 
3 
relationship, as applicable, with the qualifying patient[.]; 
4 
provided that nothing under this part shall require that the 
5 
bona fide physician-patient relationship or bona fide advanced 
6 
practice registered nurse-patient relationship be established by 
7 
conducting an initial in-person consultation.  [After the 
8 
submission of the applicant's form but before receipt of 
9 
confirmed registration from the department of health, the 
10 
applicant or primary caregiver may use the submission of the 
11 
applicant's form as proof and documentation authorizing the 
12 
applicant or primary caregiver to enter and make a one-time 
13 
purchase of cannabis from a medical cannabis dispensary licensed 
14 
under chapter 329D in an amount that is no more than fifty per 
15 
cent of the dispensing limits under section 329D-13.  The 
16 
department of health office of medical cannabis control and 
17 
regulation shall facilitate the temporary authorization for 
18 
applicants and primary caregivers.]  All current active medical 
19 
cannabis permits shall be honored through their expiration 
20 
date." 
21 

HB302 
Page 4 of 4 
 
 
 
SECTION 4.  Section 453-1.3, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is 
1 
amended by amending subsection (c) to read as follows: 
2 
 
"(c)  Treatment recommendations made via telehealth, 
3 
including issuing a prescription via electronic means, shall be 
4 
held to the same standards of appropriate practice as those in 
5 
traditional physician-patient settings that do not include [an] 
6 
in-person visit but in which prescribing is appropriate, 
7 
including on-call telephone encounters and encounters for which 
8 
a follow-up visit is arranged.  Issuing a prescription based 
9 
solely on an online questionnaire is not treatment for the 
10 
purposes of this section and does not constitute an acceptable 
11 
standard of care.  For the purposes of prescribing opiates, [or 
12 
certifying a patient for the medical use of cannabis,] a 
13 
physician-patient relationship shall only be established after 
14 
an in-person consultation between the prescribing physician and 
15 
the patient." 
16 

 
Hawaiʻi Cannabis Industry Association (HICIA) 
220 S King St #1600, Honolulu, HI 96813 
www.808hcia.com 
 
 
To:  
Representative Gregg Takayama, Chair 
 
Representative Sue Keohopaku-Lee Loy, Vice-Chair 
Members of the House Health Committee  
 
Fr: 
Blake Oshiro on behalf of the HICIA Assn.  
 
Re:  Testimony In Strong Support on House Bill (HB) 302 
RELATING TO CANNABIS 
Repeals the requirement that a provider-patient relationship be established in 
person. Allows applicants or primary caregivers to temporarily purchase medical 
cannabis after the submission of the applicant's certification form. 
 
Dear Chair Takayama, Vice-Chair Keohokapu-Lee Loy and Members of the Committee: 
The Hawaiʻi Cannabis Industry Association, represents a majority of the state’s licensed 
medical cannabis dispensaries. HICIA strongly supports HB302 which eases access 
issues for medical cannabis patients.   
When created in 2015, the medical cannabis dispensary laws were one of the most 
rigorous and strict systems amongst the dozens of states that allowed medical 
cannabis.  Since that time, the nation’s landscape and our state’s attitudes over 
cannabis have also changed dramatically such that many states allow for adult use, and 
our state has decriminalized non-medical use. There is a thriving illicit market that 
makes it easy and cheaper to access cannabis, and there is now increased availability 
of THC through hemp-derived products. Yet, Hawaii’s medical cannabis system has 
hardly changed.  
This appears to be one of the driving reasons why the number of registered patients has 
declined 15% over the past 3 years.  While HICIA continues to provide safe products 
that are tracked from seed to sale, 3rd party lab tested against impurities and pesticides, 
labeled with dosage and warnings – less patients are getting their cannabis from 
dispensaries due to price and ease. 
The purpose of this bill is to ease some of the archaic hurdles in the law that have been 
in place since 2015 that no longer seem necessary.  The laws on telehealth were 
already revised in 2021 for parity of in-person and telehealth visits to create a bona fide 
physician-patient relationship, except for opiates and medical cannabis. That distinction 
for medical cannabis at this stage appears arbitrary, and the bill proposes to eliminate 
that difference.  
 

 
Hawaiʻi Cannabis Industry Association (HICIA) 
220 S King St #1600, Honolulu, HI 96813 
www.808hcia.com 
 
 
The bill also allows a qualifying patient immediate access to enter a dispensary and 
purchase a limited amount of medical cannabis upon the Department of Health’s 
registry system recognizing the submission of a complete application.  Currently, a 
patient may wait anywhere from 3 days to a week to obtain their medical cannabis card 
or “329 card” which will then allow them to enter into a licensed dispensary.  This delay 
is often a significant barrier for patients who need their cannabis medication right away.  
It not only is a possible deterrent to obtain a 329 card, but can also serve to push a 
patient towards obtaining product from the illicit market.  
HICIA respectfully request one amendment to this bill as it inadvertently left out a mirror 
provision outside the medical cannabis statutes, but referenced in the physician's 
practice that should also be changed.   
Specifically, we request HRS Section 453-1.3(c) be amended as follows:  
    (c)   Treatment recommendations made via telehealth, including issuing 
a prescription via electronic means, shall be held to the same standards of 
appropriate practice as those in traditional physician-patient settings that 
do not include [an] in-person visit but in which prescribing is appropriate, 
including on-call telephone encounters and encounters for which a follow-
up visit is arranged.  Issuing a prescription based solely on an online 
questionnaire is not treatment for the purposes of this section and does 
not constitute an acceptable standard of care.  For the purposes of 
prescribing opiates [or certifying a patient for the medical use of cannabis], 
a physician-patient relationship shall only be established after an in-
person consultation between the prescribing physician and the patient. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 

 
 
 
To:  
Representative Gregg Takayama, Chair 
 
Representative Sue Keohopaku-Lee Loy, Vice-Chair 
Members of the House Health Committee  
 
Fr: 
TY Cheng, on behalf of Aloha Green Apothecary.  
 
Re:  Testimony In Strong Support on House Bill (HB) 302 
RELATING TO CANNABIS 
Repeals the requirement that a provider-patient relationship be established in 
person. Allows applicants or primary caregivers to temporarily purchase medical 
cannabis after the submission of the applicant's certification form. 
 
Dear Chair Takayama, Vice-Chair Keohokapu-Lee Loy and Members of the Committee: 
Aloha Green Apothecary (“Aloha”) is a state-licensed medical cannabis dispensary 
licensee operating on Oahu. Aloha strongly supports HB302 which eases access 
issues for medical cannabis patients.   
Since the introduction of the medical cannabis 329 patient registry program, the nation’s 
landscape and our state’s attitudes over cannabis have also changed dramatically such 
that many states allow for adult use, and our state has decriminalized non-medical use. 
There is a thriving illicit market that makes it easy and cheaper to access cannabis, and 
there is now increased availability of THC through hemp-derived products. Yet, Hawaii’s 
medical cannabis system has hardly changed.  
This appears to be one of the driving reasons why the number of registered patients has 
declined over the past 3 years (see table below).   
In-State 329 Patient Registration Numbers1 
Date 
Dec 2020 
Dec 2021 
Dec 2022 
Dec 2023 
Dec 2024 
# of patients 
30,847 
34,124 
33,308 
31,789 
29,882 
Change (-/+)  
+9.6 
-2.4% 
-4.7% 
-6.3% 
The purpose of this bill is to ease some of the archaic hurdles in the law that have been 
in place since 2015 that no longer seem necessary.  The laws on telehealth were 
already revised in 2021 for parity of in-person and telehealth visits to create a bona fide 
physician-patient relationship, except for opiates and medical cannabis. That distinction 
for medical cannabis at this stage appears arbitrary, and the bill proposes to eliminate 
that difference.  
 
 
1 https://health.hawaii.gov/medicalcannabisregistry/submenu/program-statistics/ 
 

 
 
 
The bill also allows a qualifying patient immediate access to enter a dispensary and 
purchase a limited amount of medical cannabis upon the Department of Health’s 
registry system recognizing the submission of a complete application.  Currently, a 
patient may wait anywhere from 3 days to a week to obtain their medical cannabis card 
or “329 card” which will then allow them to enter into a licensed dispensary. The time 
between physician qualification and card issuance is only for the Department of Health 
to confirm that names and addresses match the application for card issuance as they 
have no intent to intervene in the physician-patient relationship and second-guess the 
qualification of a medical professional. In fact, California’s medical cannabis program 
does not require patients to receive their State issued medical card, and allows patients 
to rely on a physician’s qualification letter to qualify and purchase medical cannabis. 
The Department of Health registry is not open on weekends/holidays and only 
processes registrations during standard office hours. A patient who is qualified by a 
physician on Friday might have to wait 5 excruciating days to gain access to medicine 
that can alleviate their debilitating symptoms. This delay is often a significant barrier for 
patients who need their cannabis medication right away.  This is a possible deterrent to 
obtaining a 329 card but also serves to push a patient towards obtaining cannabis 
products from the illicit market.  
Finally, the Department of Health registry system issues a registration number and a 
submission confirmation to the qualifying physician upon qualification. A qualifying 
physician merely has to select “qualified” in the Department of Health’s online physician 
portal to generate these documents. The documents may be printed to be used as 
evidence of the pending 329 card issuance. This State-generated document should 
provide sufficient evidence for one of the eight dispensary licenses to provide a limited 
amount of medicine to ease a patient’s suffering. This same documentation should 
provide reasonable legal protections for the patient.  
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I am available for any questions.  

 
 
 
 
First Hawaiian Center 
T 808-539-0400 
999 Bishop Street, Suite 1400 
mito@awlaw.com 
Honolulu, HI 96813 
 
 
 
 
DATE: 
January 29, 2025 
 
TO: 
Representative Gregg Takayama 
Chair, Committee on Health 
Representative Sue Keohokapu-Lee Loy 
Vice Chair, Committee on Health 
 
FROM: 
Mihoko Ito 
 
RE: 
H.B. 302 – Relating to Cannabis (HLT, CPC, JHA) 
Hearing Date: Wednesday, January 29, 2025 at 10:00 a.m. 
Conference Room: 329 
 
Dear Chair Takayama, Vice Chair Keohokapu-Lee Loy, and members of the 
Committee: 
 
We submit this testimony on behalf of Cure Oahu in support of H.B. 302, Relating 
to Cannabis, which repeals the requirement that a provider-patient relationship be 
established in person and allows applicants or primary caregivers to temporarily 
purchase medical cannabis after the submission of the applicant's certification form. 
 
Cure Oahu supports this bill because it will ease the difficulties on patients and 
primary caregivers to navigate the registration process for the medical cannabis 
program.  The number of registered medical cannabis patients has been in decline 
since 2021.  There are various issues with the registration process -  including the 
limited number of providers participating in the certification process, the costs 
incurred by patients as part of the certification process, and the proliferation of illicit 
market products.  
 
We believe that access to medical cannabis should be as streamlined as possible to 
ensure that patients can obtain their medical cannabis cards and access medical 
cannabis in a way that keeps patients and the public safe rather than bypassing the 
medical program altogether. Allowing full access via telehealth and providing the 
temporary purchase of small amounts of cannabis will help streamline access while 
balancing public safety concerns. 
 
For these reasons, we support this measure and ask that the Committee pass 
H.B.302.  Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of this 
measure.   

HB302-WRITTEN TESTIMONY-OTTO-29JAN25 
1 
 
 
Akamai Cannabis Consulting 
3615 Harding Ave, Suite 304 
Honolulu, HI  96816 
 
TESTIMONY ON HOUSE BILL 302 
RELATING TO CANNABIS 
 
Clifton Otto, MD 
 
House Committee on Health 
Representative Gregg Takayama, Chair 
Representative Sue L. Keohokapu-Lee Loy, Vice Chair 
 
Wednesday, January 29, 2025 - 10:00 AM 
State Capitol, Room 329 & Videoconference 
 
 
Broad changes to Hawaii’s Medical Cannabis Program are necessary to improve 
participation and access, which can provide an alternative to recreational legalization 
that will allow for better regulatory oversight and protection of the State’s authority over 
the intrastate medical use of cannabis. 
 
Please consider replacing this bill with the following revision of Hawaii’s Medical Use of 
Cannabis Act, Chapter 329, Part XI, Hawaii Revised Statutes: 
 
Take action to protect the intrastate medical use of cannabis: 
 
§329D-25  Coordination among state and federal agencies.  The department shall 
initiate ongoing dialogue among relevant state and federal agencies to identify 
processes and policies that ensure the privacy of qualifying patients [and qualifying out-
of-state patients] and the compliance of qualifying patients, primary caregivers, 
[qualifying out-of-state patients, and caregivers of qualifying out-of-state patients] and 
medical cannabis dispensaries with state laws and regulations related to medical 
cannabis; provided that such dialogue shall include proceeding with HCR132 (2021). 
 
§329-121  Definitions.  As used in this part: 
 
Allow certifying providers to decide adequate supply: 
 

HB302-WRITTEN TESTIMONY-OTTO-29JAN25 
2 
 
"Adequate supply" means an amount of medical cannabis jointly possessed between 
the qualifying patient and the primary caregiver that is not more than is reasonably 
necessary to ensure the uninterrupted availability of cannabis for the purpose of 
alleviating the symptoms or effects of a qualifying patient's debilitating medical 
condition; provided that an "adequate supply" shall not exceed:  ten cannabis plants, 
whether immature or mature, and four ounces of usable cannabis at any given time, or 
an amount determined by the certifying physician or APRN.  The [four ounces of] usable 
cannabis shall include any combination of usable cannabis and manufactured cannabis 
products, as provided in chapter 329D, with the cannabis in the manufactured cannabis 
products being calculated using information provided pursuant to section 329D-9(c). 
 [ "Adequate supply for a qualifying out-of-state patient" means an amount of cannabis 
individually possessed by a qualifying out-of-state patient or jointly possessed by a 
qualifying out-of-state patient who is under eighteen years old and the caregiver of the 
qualifying out-of-state patient that is not more than is reasonably necessary to ensure 
the uninterrupted availability of cannabis for the purpose of alleviating the symptoms or 
effects of the qualifying out-of-state patient's debilitating medical condition; provided that 
an "adequate supply for a qualifying out-of-state patient" shall not exceed four ounces of 
usable cannabis at any given time and shall not include live plants.  The four ounces of 
usable cannabis shall include any combination of usable cannabis and manufactured 
cannabis products, as provided in chapter 329D; provided that the usable cannabis in 
the manufactured products shall be calculated using information provided pursuant to 
section 329D-9(c). ] 
 
Remove the DEA registration requirement for APRNs: 
 
"Advanced practice registered nurse" means an advanced practice registered nurse 
who is licensed to practice under chapter 457 [ with prescriptive authority as described 
in section 457-8.6 and registered under section 329-32 ]. 
 
Remove out-of-state language to treat local and visiting patients equally: 
 
[ "Caregiver of a qualifying out-of-state patient" means a parent, guardian, or person 
having legal custody of a qualifying out-of-state patient who is under the age of eighteen 
years. ] 
 
Allow certifying providers to decide qualifying conditions: 
 
 "Debilitating medical condition" means any condition determined by the certifying 
physician or APRN. [ : 
     (1)  Cancer, glaucoma, lupus, epilepsy, multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, 
positive status for human immunodeficiency virus, acquired immune deficiency 
syndrome, or the treatment of these conditions; 

HB302-WRITTEN TESTIMONY-OTTO-29JAN25 
3 
 
     (2)  A chronic or debilitating disease or medical condition or its treatment that 
produces one or more of the following: 
          (A)  Cachexia or wasting syndrome; 
          (B)  Severe pain; 
          (C)  Severe nausea; 
          (D)  Seizures, including those characteristic of epilepsy; 
          (E)  Severe and persistent muscle spasms, including those characteristic of 
multiple sclerosis or Crohn's disease; or 
          (F)  Post-traumatic stress disorder; or 
     (3)  Any other medical condition approved by the department of health pursuant to 
administrative rules in response to a request from a physician or advanced practice 
registered nurse or potentially qualifying patient. ] 
 
Clarify the term “distribution” under Medical Use: 
 
 "Medical use" means the acquisition, possession, cultivation, use, distribution, or 
transportation of cannabis or paraphernalia relating to the administration of cannabis to 
alleviate the symptoms or effects of a qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition. [ 
; provided that "medical use" does not include the cultivation or distribution of cannabis 
or paraphernalia by a qualifying out-of-state patient or the caregiver of a qualifying out-
of-state patient. ]  For the purposes of "medical use", the term "distribution" is limited to 
the transfer of cannabis and paraphernalia between those authorized to engage in the 
medical use of cannabis. 
 
Remove the DEA registration requirement for physicians: 
 
"Physician" means a person who is licensed to practice under chapter 453 [ and is 
licensed with authority to prescribe drugs and is registered under section 329-32 
].  "Physician" does not include a physician assistant as described in section 453-5.3. 
 
Make Written Certifications valid for only one year again: 
 
"Written certification" means [ the qualifying patient's medical records or ] a statement 
signed by a qualifying patient's physician or advanced practice registered nurse, stating 
that in the physician's or advanced practice registered nurse's professional opinion, the 
qualifying patient has a debilitating medical condition and the potential benefits of the 
medical use of cannabis would likely outweigh the health risks for the qualifying 
patient.  The department of health shall [ may ] require, through its rulemaking authority, 
that all written certifications comply with a designated form.  "Written certifications" are 
valid for one year from the time of signing [ ; provided that the department of health may 
allow for the validity of any written certification for three years if the qualifying patient's 

HB302-WRITTEN TESTIMONY-OTTO-29JAN25 
4 
 
physician or advanced practice registered nurse states that the patient's debilitating 
medical condition is chronic in nature ] . 
 
Remove out-of-state language and clarify transportation: 
 
§329-122  Medical use of cannabis; conditions of use.  (a)  Notwithstanding any law 
to the contrary, the medical use of cannabis by a qualifying patient shall be permitted 
only if: 
     (1)  The qualifying patient has been diagnosed by a physician or advanced practice 
registered nurse as having a debilitating medical condition; 
     (2)  The qualifying patient's physician or advanced practice registered nurse has 
certified in writing that, in the physician's or advanced practice registered nurse's 
professional opinion, the potential benefits of the medical use of cannabis would likely 
outweigh the health risks for the particular qualifying patient; and 
     (3)  The amount of cannabis possessed by the qualifying patient does not exceed an 
adequate supply. 
     (b)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to a qualifying patient under the age of eighteen 
years, unless: 
     (1)  The qualifying patient's physician or advanced practice registered nurse has 
explained the potential risks and benefits of the medical use of cannabis to the 
qualifying patient and to a parent, guardian, or person having legal custody of the 
qualifying patient; and 
     (2)  A parent, guardian, or person having legal custody consents in writing to: 
          (A)  Allow the qualifying patient's medical use of cannabis; 
          (B)  Serve as the qualifying patient's primary caregiver; and 
          (C)  Control the acquisition of the cannabis, the dosage, and the frequency of the 
medical use of cannabis by the qualifying patient. 
     [ (c)  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the medical use of cannabis within the 
State by a qualifying out-of-state patient aged eighteen years or older legally authorized 
to use cannabis for medical purposes in another state, a United States territory, or the 
District of Columbia shall be permitted only if the qualifying out-of-state patient: 
     (1)  Provides to the department of health a valid medical use of cannabis card with 
an explicit expiration date that has not yet passed from the issuing jurisdiction and a 
valid photographic identification card or driver's license issued by the same jurisdiction; 
     (2)  Attests under penalty of law pursuant to section 710-1063 that the condition for 
which the qualifying out-of-state patient is legally authorized to use cannabis for medical 
purposes is a debilitating medical condition as defined in section 329-121; 
     (3)  Provides consent for the department of health to obtain information from the 
qualifying out-of-state patient's certifying medical provider and from the entity that 
issued the medical cannabis card for the purpose of allowing the department of health 
to verify the information provided in the registration process; 

HB302-WRITTEN TESTIMONY-OTTO-29JAN25 
5 
 
     (4)  Pays the required fee for out-of-state registration to use cannabis for medical 
purposes; 
     (5)  Registers with the department of health pursuant to section 329-123.5 to use 
cannabis for medical purposes; 
     (6)  Receives a medical cannabis registry card from the department of health; and 
     (7)  Abides by all laws relating to the medical use of cannabis, including not 
possessing an amount of cannabis that exceeds an adequate supply. 
     (d)  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the medical use of cannabis by a 
qualifying out-of-state patient under eighteen years of age shall only be permitted if: 
     (1)  The caregiver of the qualifying out-of-state patient provides the information 
required pursuant to subsection (c); and 
     (2)  The caregiver of the qualifying out-of-state patient consents in writing to: 
          (A)  Allow the qualifying out-of-state patient's medical use of cannabis; 
          (B)  Undertake the responsibility for managing the well-being of the qualifying out-
of-state patient who is under eighteen years of age with respect to the medical use of 
cannabis; and 
          (C)  Control the acquisition of the cannabis, the dosage, and the frequency of the 
medical use of cannabis by the qualifying out-of-state patient who is under eighteen 
years of age. ] 
     (c) [ (e) ]  The authorization for the medical use of cannabis in this section shall not 
apply to: 
     (1)  The medical use of cannabis that endangers the health or well-being of another 
person; 
     (2)  The medical use of cannabis: 
          (A)  In a school bus, public bus, or any moving vehicle; 
          (B)  In the workplace of one's employment, unless specifically authorized by the 
employer; 
          (C)  On any school grounds, unless specially authorized by the DOE 
Superintendent; 
          (D)  At any public park, public beach, public recreation center, recreation or youth 
center; or 
          (E)  At any other place open to the public; provided that a qualifying patient, 
primary caregiver, [ qualifying out-of-state patient, caregiver of a qualifying out-of-state 
patient, ] or an owner or employee of a medical cannabis dispensary licensed under 
chapter 329D shall not be prohibited from transporting cannabis or any manufactured 
cannabis product, as that term is defined in section 329D-1, in any public place; 
provided further that the cannabis or manufactured cannabis product shall be 
transported in a sealed container, not be visible to the public, and shall not be removed 
from its sealed container or consumed or used in any way while it is in the public place; 
and 

HB302-WRITTEN TESTIMONY-OTTO-29JAN25 
6 
 
     (3)  The use of cannabis by a qualifying patient, parent, or primary caregiver [ , 
qualifying out-of-state patient, or caregiver of a qualifying out-of-state patient, ] for 
purposes other than medical use permitted by this part. 
     (d) [ (f) ]  For the purposes of this section, "transport" means the transportation of 
cannabis, usable cannabis, or any manufactured cannabis product between: 
     (1)  A qualifying patient and the qualifying patient's primary caregiver; 
     (2)  A qualifying out-of-state patient under eighteen years of age and the caregiver of 
a qualifying out-of-state patient; 
     (3)  The production centers and the retail dispensing locations under a dispensary 
licensee's license; 
     (4)  Dispensaries, to the extent authorized by section 329D-6(r); or 
     (5)  A production center, retail dispensing location, qualifying patient, primary 
caregiver, qualifying out-of-state patient, or caregiver of a qualifying out-of-state patient 
and a certified laboratory for the purpose of laboratory testing; provided that a qualifying 
patient, primary caregiver, qualifying out-of-state patient, or caregiver of a qualifying out-
of-state patient may only transport up to one gram of cannabis per test to a certified 
laboratory for laboratory testing and may only transport the product if the qualifying 
patient, primary caregiver, qualifying out-of-state patient, or caregiver of a qualifying out-
of-state patient: 
          (A)  Secures an appointment for testing at a certified laboratory; 
          (B)  Obtains confirmation, which may be electronic, that includes the specific time 
and date of the appointment and a detailed description of the product and amount to be 
transported to the certified laboratory for the appointment; and 
          (C)  Has the confirmation, which may be electronic, available during transport. 
     For purposes of interisland transportation, "transport" of cannabis, usable cannabis, 
or any manufactured cannabis product, by any means is allowable only between 
dispensaries to the extent authorized by section 329D-6(r) and between a production 
center or retail dispensing location and a certified laboratory for the sole purpose of 
laboratory testing pursuant to section 329D-8, as permitted under section 329D-6(m) 
and subject to section 329D-6(j), and by a qualifying patient or their primary caregiver; 
provided that such transport shall only be authorized within the jurisdictional limits of the 
State. [ with the understanding that state law and its protections do not apply outside of 
the jurisdictional limits of the State.   Allowable transport pursuant to this section does 
not include interisland transportation by any means or for any purpose between a 
qualifying patient, primary caregiver, qualifying out-of-state patient, or caregiver of a 
qualifying out-of-state patient and any other entity or individual, including an individual 
who is a qualifying patient, primary caregiver, qualifying out-of-state patient, or caregiver 
of a qualifying out-of-state patient. ] 
(e) The department shall pursue the federal aviation exemption available under FAA 
regulation 14 CFR 91.19 for the interisland intrastate transport of medical cannabis, and 
shall promote prep labs on islands that fall outside the jurisdictional limits of the State 

HB302-WRITTEN TESTIMONY-OTTO-29JAN25 
7 
 
and do not have access to local testing so that de minimis samples can be sent to Oahu 
for required potency and contaminant testing. 
 
Require instantaneous registration application approval and expand caregiving: 
 
§329-123  Registration requirements; qualifying patients; primary 
caregivers.  (a)  Physicians or advanced practice registered nurses who issue written 
certifications shall provide, in each written certification, the name, address, patient 
identification number, and other identifying information of the qualifying patient.  The 
department of health shall require, in rules adopted pursuant to chapter 91, that all 
written certifications comply with a designated form completed by or on behalf of a 
qualifying patient.  The form shall require information from the applicant, primary 
caregiver, and physician or advanced practice registered nurse as specifically required 
or permitted by this chapter.  The form shall require the address of the location where 
the cannabis is grown; provided that the grow site address [ and ] shall not appear on 
the registry card issued by the department of health.  The certifying physician or 
advanced practice registered nurse shall be required to have a bona fide physician-
patient relationship or bona fide advanced practice registered nurse-patient relationship, 
as applicable, with the qualifying patient.  All current active medical cannabis permits 
shall be honored through their expiration date. 
     (b)  Qualifying patients shall register with the department of health.  The registration 
shall be effective until the expiration of the certificate issued by the department of health 
and signed by the physician or advanced practice registered nurse.  Every qualifying 
patient shall provide sufficient identifying information to establish the personal identities 
of the qualifying patient and the primary caregiver.  Qualifying patients shall report 
changes in information within ten working days.  Every qualifying patient shall have only 
one primary caregiver at any given time.  The department of health shall issue to the 
qualifying patient a registration certificate and may charge a fee for the certificate in an 
amount adopted by rules pursuant to chapter 91. 
     (c)  Primary caregivers shall register with the department of health.  Each [ Every ] 
primary caregiver may [ shall ] be responsible for the care of no more than ten [ only 
one ] qualifying patients at any given time, unless the primary caregiver is the parent, 
guardian, or person having legal custody of more than one minor qualifying patient, in 
which case the primary caregiver may be responsible for the care of more than one 
minor qualifying patient at any given time; provided that the primary caregiver is the 
parent, guardian, or person having legal custody of all of the primary caregiver's 
qualifying patients.  The department of health may permit registration of up to two 
primary caregivers for a minor qualifying patient; provided that both primary caregivers 
are the parent, guardian, or person having legal custody of the minor qualifying patient. 
     (d)  Upon inquiry by a law enforcement agency, which inquiry may be made twenty-
four hours a day, seven days a week, the department of health shall immediately verify 

HB302-WRITTEN TESTIMONY-OTTO-29JAN25 
8 
 
whether the subject of the inquiry has registered with the department of health and may 
provide reasonable access to the registry information for official law enforcement 
purposes. 
     (e) The department shall use AI technology to make registration approval 
instantaneous.  In those instances where application errors are detected, the defective 
application shall be instantaneously returned to the certifying physician or APRN for 
correction and resubmission. 
   [  (e)  This section shall not apply to registration of a qualifying out-of-state patient or a 
caregiver of a qualifying out-of-state patient. ] 
 
Remove out-of-state language: 
 
[ §329-123.5  Registration requirements; qualifying out-of-state patient; caregiver 
of a qualifying out-of-state patient. ] 
[ (a)  Notwithstanding section 329-123, a qualifying out-of-state patient and a caregiver 
of a qualifying out-of-state patient shall register with the department of health as 
established by rule.  The registration shall be effective for no more than sixty days and 
may be renewed for no more than one additional sixty-day period that begins no later 
than twelve months after the preceding registration date; provided that the department 
shall not register any qualifying out-of-state patient for a period that exceeds the term of 
validity of the qualifying out-of-state patient's authority to use medical cannabis in the 
qualifying out-of-state patient's home jurisdiction. 
     (b)  A qualifying out-of-state patient aged eighteen or older, at a minimum, shall meet 
the following criteria for registration: 
     (1)  Provide a valid government-issued medical cannabis card issued to the 
qualifying out-of-state patient by another state, United States territory, or the District of 
Columbia; provided that the medical cannabis card has an expiration date and has not 
expired; 
     (2)  Provide a valid photographic identification card or driver's license issued by the 
same jurisdiction that issued the medical cannabis card; and 
     (3)  Have a debilitating medical condition, as defined in section 329-121. 
     (c)  A qualifying out-of-state patient under eighteen years of age may be registered 
pursuant to this section only if the qualifying patient has a debilitating medical condition 
as defined in section 329-121 and the caregiver of the qualifying out-of-state patient, at 
a minimum, meets the requirements of paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (b) and 
consents in writing to: 
     (1)  Allow the qualifying out-of-state patient's medical use of cannabis; 
     (2)  Undertake the responsibility for managing the well-being of the qualifying out-of-
state patient who is under eighteen years of age, with respect to the medical use of 
cannabis; and 

HB302-WRITTEN TESTIMONY-OTTO-29JAN25 
9 
 
     (3)  Control the acquisition of the cannabis, the dosage, and the frequency of the 
medical use of cannabis by the qualifying out-of-state patient who is under eighteen 
years of age. 
     (d)  In the case of any qualifying out-of-state patient who is under eighteen years of 
age, the department of health shall register the qualifying out-of-state patient and the 
caregiver of the qualifying out-of-state patient; provided that the department may 
register two caregivers for a qualifying out-of-state patient if each caregiver is the 
parent, guardian, or person having legal custody of the qualifying out-of-state patient 
who is under eighteen years of age. 
     (e)  Each qualifying out-of-state patient shall pay a fee in an amount established by 
rules adopted by the department pursuant to chapter 91 for each registration and 
renewal. 
     (f)  Upon inquiry by a law enforcement agency, the department of health shall 
immediately verify whether the subject of the inquiry has registered with the department 
of health and may provide reasonable access to the registry information for official law 
enforcement purposes.  An inquiry and verification under this subsection may be made 
twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week. 
     (g)  The department of health may temporarily suspend the registration of a 
qualifying out-of-state patient or a registered caregiver of a qualifying out-of-state 
patient for a period of up to thirty days if the department of health determines that the 
registration process for qualifying patients or primary caregivers is being adversely 
affected or the supply of cannabis for medical use available in licensed dispensaries is 
insufficient to serve qualifying patients and qualifying out-of-state patients.  A temporary 
suspension may be extended by thirty-day periods until the department of health 
determines that: 
     (1)  Adequate capacity exists to register qualifying out-of-state patients and 
caregivers of qualifying out-of-state patients in addition to qualifying patients and 
primary caregivers; and 
     (2)  The licensed dispensaries are able to meet the demands of qualifying patients. ] 
 
Remove out-of-state language: 
 
§329-125  Protections afforded to a qualifying patient, or primary caregiver [ , 
qualifying out-of-state patient, or caregiver of a qualifying out-of-state patient ] 
.  (a)  A qualifying patient, or primary caregiver [ , qualifying out-of-state patient, or 
caregiver of a qualifying out-of-state patient ] may assert the medical use of cannabis 
authorized under this part as an affirmative defense to any prosecution involving 
marijuana under this part, part IV, or part IV of chapter 712; provided that the qualifying 
patient, or primary caregiver [ , qualifying out-of-state patient, or caregiver of a qualifying 
out-of-state patient ] strictly complied with the requirements of this part. 

HB302-WRITTEN TESTIMONY-OTTO-29JAN25 
10 
 
     (b)  Any qualifying patient, or primary caregiver [ , qualifying out-of-state patient, or 
caregiver of a qualifying out-of-state patient ] not complying with the permitted scope of 
the medical use of cannabis shall not be afforded the protections against searches and 
seizures pertaining to the misapplication of the medical use of cannabis. 
     (c)  No person shall be subject to arrest or prosecution for simply being in the 
presence or vicinity of the medical use of cannabis as permitted under this part. 
 
Remove out-of-state language: 
 
§329-125.5  Medical cannabis patient and caregiver protections.  (a)  No school 
shall refuse to enroll or otherwise penalize, and no landlord shall refuse to lease 
property to or otherwise penalize, a person solely for the person's status as a qualifying 
patient or primary caregiver in the medical cannabis program under this part, unless 
failing to do so would cause the school or landlord to lose a monetary or licensing-
related benefit under federal law or regulation; provided that the qualifying patient or 
primary caregiver strictly complied with the requirements of this part; provided further 
that the qualifying patient or primary caregiver shall present a medical cannabis registry 
card or certificate and photo identification, to ensure that the qualifying patient or 
primary caregiver is validly registered with the department of health pursuant to section 
329-123. 
     (b)  For the purposes of medical care, including organ transplants, a registered 
qualifying patient's use of cannabis in compliance with this part shall be considered the 
equivalent of the use of any other medication under the direction of a physician and 
shall not constitute the use of an illicit substance or otherwise disqualify a registered 
qualifying patient from medical care. 
     (c)  No qualifying patient or primary caregiver under this part shall be denied custody 
of, visitation with, or parenting time with a minor, and there shall be no presumption of 
neglect or child endangerment, for conduct allowed under this part; provided that this 
subsection shall not apply if the qualifying patient's or primary caregiver's conduct 
created a danger to the safety of the minor, as established by a preponderance of the 
evidence. 
     (d)  This section shall apply to qualifying patients, or primary caregivers [ , qualifying 
out-of-state patients, and caregivers of qualifying out-of-state patients ] who are validly 
registered with the department of health pursuant to this part and the administrative 
rules of the department of health. 
 
Allow telehealth for all medical cannabis patients: 
 
§329-126  Protections afforded to a treating physician or advanced practice 
registered nurse.  (a)  No physician or advanced practice registered nurse shall be 
subject to arrest or prosecution, penalized in any manner, or denied any right or 

HB302-WRITTEN TESTIMONY-OTTO-29JAN25 
11 
 
privilege for providing written certification for the medical use of cannabis for a qualifying 
patient; provided that: 
     (1)  The physician or advanced practice registered nurse has diagnosed the patient 
as having a debilitating medical condition, as defined in section 329-121; 
     (2)  The physician or advanced practice registered nurse has explained the potential 
risks and benefits of the medical use of cannabis, as required under section 329-122; 
     (3)  The written certification is based upon the physician's or advanced practice 
registered nurse's professional opinion after having completed a full assessment of the 
patient's medical history and current medical condition made in the course of a bona 
fide physician-patient relationship or bona fide advanced practice registered nurse-
patient relationship, as applicable; and 
     (4)  The physician or advanced practice registered nurse has complied with the 
registration requirements of section 329-123. 
     (b)  For purposes of this section, a bona fide physician-patient relationship may be 
established via telehealth, as defined in section 453-1.3(j), and a bona fide advanced 
practice registered nurse-patient relationship may be established via telehealth, as 
defined in section 457-2 [ ; provided that treatment recommendations that include 
certifying a patient for the medical use of cannabis via telehealth shall be allowed only 
after an initial in-person consultation between the certifying physician or advanced 
practice registered nurse and the patient ] . 
 
Remove out-of-state language: 
 
§329-127  Protection of cannabis and other seized property.  (a)  Cannabis, 
paraphernalia, or other property seized from a qualifying patient or primary caregiver in 
connection with a claimed medical use of cannabis under this part shall be returned 
immediately upon the determination by a court that the qualifying patient or primary 
caregiver is entitled to the protections of this part, as evidenced by a decision not to 
prosecute, dismissal of charges, or an acquittal; provided that law enforcement 
agencies seizing live plants as evidence shall not be responsible for the care and 
maintenance of such plants. 
     (b)  [ This section shall also apply to qualifying out-of-state patients and caregivers of 
qualifying out-of-state patients who are validly registered with the department of health 
pursuant to this part and the administrative rules of the department of health; provided 
that notwithstanding subsection (a) to the contrary, under ]  Under no circumstances 
shall cannabis, paraphernalia, or other property be returned to any location outside of 
the island from which it was seized. 
 
Clarifying solvent prohibition: 
 
§329-129  Prohibited acts; flammable solvents.  (a)  No qualifying patient, or primary 
caregiver [ , qualifying out-of-state patient, or caregiver of a qualifying out-of-state 

HB302-WRITTEN TESTIMONY-OTTO-29JAN25 
12 
 
patient ] shall use butane to extract any cannabinoid [ tetrahydrocannabinol ] from 
cannabis plants. 
     (b)  Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a class C felony. 
 
Allowing ten patients per grow site and primary caregiver cultivation any island: 
 
§329-130  Authorized sources of medical cannabis.  (a)  [ After December 31, 2024, 
a ] A qualifying patient shall obtain medical cannabis or manufactured cannabis 
products only: 
     (1)  From a dispensary licensed pursuant to chapter 329D; provided that the 
cannabis shall be purchased and paid for at the time of purchase; or 
     (2)  By cultivating cannabis in an amount that does not exceed an adequate supply 
for the qualifying patient, pursuant to section 329-122; provided that each location used 
to cultivate cannabis shall be used by no more than ten [ five ] qualifying patients. 
[ After December 31, 2024, no primary caregiver shall be authorized to cultivate 
cannabis for any qualifying patient. 
     (b)  This section shall not apply to: 
     (1)  A qualifying patient who is a minor or an adult lacking legal capacity and the 
primary caregiver is the parent, guardian, or person having legal custody of a qualifying 
patient described in this paragraph; or 
     (2)  A qualifying patient on any island on which there is no medical cannabis 
dispensary licensed pursuant to chapter 329D. 
     (c)  A qualifying out-of-state patient and a caregiver of a qualifying out-of-state 
patient shall be authorized to obtain cannabis for medical use only from retail 
dispensing locations of dispensaries licensed pursuant to chapter 329D. ] 
 
 

To: 
 
Representative Gregg Takayama, Chair 
 
 
Representative Sue Keohokapu-Lee Loy 
                          Members of the House Committee on Health 
  
Fr:                       Karlyn Laulusa, Chief Executive Officer, Noa Botanicals 
  
Re:                      Testimony with Comments of House Bill (HB) 302 
              
Measure Title:             RELATING TO CANNABIS. 
Report Title:                 Medical Cannabis; Access; Providers; Certification 
Companion:                SB1069 
  
Aloha Chair, Vice-Chair, and members of the committee, 
  
My name is Karlyn Laulusa and I’m the Chief Executive Officer at Noa Botanicals, a medical 
licensee on the island of Oahu and I stand in strong support of HB302. 
  
When the medical cannabis dispensary program was created 10-years ago, it was designed 
to prevent abuse and included stringent restrictions. However, over the past ten-years 
much has changed, and the original rules and regulations have had the unintended 
consequence of driving those seeking medical cannabis to the illicit black market.  The 
program continues to struggle as enrollment has dropped precipitously by 15% since 2021 
due to the following - 
  
1. There is limited physician participation statewide with only 234 physicians and 
APRN’s having issued one or more cards in 2023.  
2. The requirement of an in-person physician-patient visit to establish a bona-fide 
relationship with a card issuer is burdensome. 
3. The uninsured and uncontrolled cost of a medical cannabis card can range from 
$100 to $300 omit the $38.50 state fee, depending on the provider and island. 
4. With limited physician participation, mandatory in-person visits, and high cost of 
entry, the program has become unaffordable and unattractive.  
5. The next largest impacting factor has been the explosion of viable cannabis 
products that are being sold under the guise of hemp at businesses that allow 
immediate access as they do not require a medical card, offer online sales and in 
some cases delivery services. 
 
This bill aims to improve access to safe, regulated medical cannabis for qualified patients 
in Hawaii by easing at least one of the existing restrictions. 
  
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony. 
Aloha, 
Karlyn Laulusa 
 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

 
 
Lau Ola LLC, dba Big Island Grown Dispensaries 
HILO WAIMEA KONA 
 
 
To:  
Representative Gregg Takayama, Chair  
Representative Sue Keohopaku-Lee Loy, Vice-Chair  
Members of the House Health Committee  
 
From: Jaclyn Moore, Pharm.D., CEO Big Island Grown Dispensaries   
 
Re:  
Testimony In Strong Support on House Bill (HB) 302 RELATING TO CANNABIS  
 
Repeals the requirement that a provider-patient relationship be established in person. Allows applicants 
or primary caregivers to temporarily purchase medical cannabis after the submission of the applicant's 
certification form.  
 
Dear Chair Takayama, Vice-Chair Keohokapu-Lee Loy and Members of the Committee:  
 
Big Island Grown, a state-licensed medical cannabis dispensary operating in Hawaii County, stands in 
strong support of HB 302. Over the past three years, the number of patients registered to receive medical 
cannabis has dropped by over 15%. One of the primary causes of this decline are regulatory barriers for 
patients to access cannabis through the legal dispensary system.   
 
Currently, patients must be certified as having one or more qualifying conditions via an in-person 
diagnosis from a small pool of registered certifying providers. Patients then wait days to receive a medical 
cannabis card to be eligible to even enter a state-licensed dispensary for their cannabis medication. For 
many patients who are terminally ill or in severe chronic pain, an in-person visit can be logistically 
challenging to schedule and make travel arrangements for.  Based on the severity of circumstance, any 
delay in a patient’s ability to access medical cannabis via the state-licensed dispensary system may simply 
drive them to alternate untested, unregulated sources. Legal access to medical cannabis via the 
dispensary system should be immediate following certification by a provider, especially for terminal 
patients.  
 
HB302 seeks to address these challenges and bolster patients’ access to cannabis medication by: 
 
• 
Allowing initial physician consultation to occur via telemedicine – a safe and common medical 
practice used increasingly since the COVID-19 pandemic. 
 
• 
Allowing patients to temporarily purchase a limited quantity of cannabis medication upon 
submission of a certification form and while awaiting delivery of the medical cannabis patient 
card.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in strong support. Without these important changes to the 
medical cannabis program, patient access to care will continue to decline and risk to public safety will 
increase as patients continue to turn to alternate untested, unregulated sources for their medical 
cannabis needs.   
 
Jaclyn L. Moore, Pharm.D., CEO Big Island Grown Dispensaries 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

HB-302 
Submitted on: 2/2/2025 2:18:08 PM 
Testimony for HLT on 1/29/2025 10:00:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Alexis Muller 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I am writing in support of HB302, which allows medical cannabis patients to access their 
medication without delay while waiting for a registration card from the Department of Health. 
Passing this bill into law will support medical cannabis patients and help sustain the medical 
cannabis patient program. This law encourages patients to join and remain in the program while 
promoting public health initiatives for safe and responsible cannabis use. 
 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 
