 
 
 
 
 
 
The Judiciary, State of Hawai‘i 
 
Testimony to the Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 Regular Session 
 
Senate Committee on Judiciary 
Senator Karl Rhoads, Chair 
Senator Mike Gabbard, Vice Chair 
 
Wednesday, March 19, 2025, 9:45 a.m. 
State Capitol, Conference Room 016 
 
by 
Robert D. S. Kim 
Chief Court Administrator 
Third Circuit Court 
 
 
Bill No. and Title: House Bill No. 727, H.D. 1, Relating to the Women’s Court. 
 
Purpose: Establishes a temporary three-year women's court pilot program within the Second 
and Fifth Circuits. Requires the Third Circuit of the Judiciary and Big Island Drug Court to 
conduct an interim study to establish a blueprint for a women's court pilot program in the Third 
Circuit. Requires reports. Establishes temporary positions. Appropriates funds. Effective 
7/1/3000. Sunsets 6/30/2028. (HD1) 
 
Third Circuit's Position:  
 
The Third Circuit supports the intent of this measure to expand the women’s court pilot 
project.  However, the Third Circuit proposes amendments and modifications to this bill so that 
the pilot project can be implemented in the Third Circuit and can be successful in light of the 
lack of availability of community-based mental health services on the neighbor islands. 
 
The Third Circuit respectfully requests the bill to be amended to reflect a two-year 
program for the Big Island.  Attached to this testimony is a detailed proposal for the 
establishment of a two-year Women’s Court pilot project in the Kona Division of the Third 
Circuit Court.  In order to successfully implement this Kona Women’s Court (“KWC”) program, 
this bill would need to be modified to: (1) establish a two-year women’s court pilot project in the 
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit; (2) provide for sufficient funding and staff to operate the 
program in Kona for the duration of the two-year pilot project; (3) permit the program to operate 

House Bill No. 727, H.D. 1, Relating to the Women’s Court 
Senate Committee on Judiciary 
 
Wednesday, March 19, 2025 
 
Page 2  
 
 
as a separate program under the supervision of Big Island Drug Court (“BIDC”); (4) establish 
direct-provider positions and funding for direct services, which are otherwise unavailable on the 
Big Island; and (5) delete the provisions of the bill requiring the Second and Fifth Circuits to 
establish a three-year women’s court pilot project.     
 
The Circuit Courts in the Third Circuit are structured very differently than those of the 
First Circuit.  Due to the large size of Hawaiʻi Island, the Third Circuit has two main courthouses 
housing Circuit Courts—one in Hilo and one in Kona.  These courthouses are located 100 miles 
apart.  The Circuit Courts in the Third Circuit are also dual-docket courts, meaning Circuit Court 
judges are responsible for hearing all case types, including criminal, civil, agency appeals, 
environmental cases, and more.  Due to these practical restrictions on the courts’ calendar and 
the geography of the island, it has never been practical in the Third Circuit to have standalone 
specialty courts, as has been done successfully in the First Circuit.  Nevertheless, the Third 
Circuit has a history of implementing successful treatment court programs, and the Judiciary now 
looks forward to the opportunity to build upon this history and establish a successful women’s 
court program in Kona. 
  
Our proposal calls for the KWC program to be supervised by the Kona Division of BIDC.  
This administrative structure is similar to the other successful treatment court programs currently 
offered in the Third Circuit.  Due to the success of the BIDC program, Veterans’ Treatment 
Court and Juvenile Treatment Court programs have also been implemented in the Third Circuit.  
These programs are not standalone courts, but rather operate as separate divisions of BIDC with 
their own programming, eligibility requirements, and procedures.  The proposed KWC program 
would be the latest addition to these successful specialty court programs. 
 
Accordingly, by situating KWC under the supervision of BIDC with our other treatment 
court programs, the existing BIDC structure and staff can be leveraged at the outset of the 
program, allowing us to supplement existing services with the additional resources to be 
provided by this bill.  This structure will maximize existing resources and allow the program to 
focus its efforts on developing the programming and services that are at the heart of this pilot 
project.  Additionally, to be an effective use of resources, the KWC program will require a 
critical mass of female probationers in West Hawaiʻi who may be eligible for the program.  The 
highest-risk justice-involved women in the Third Circuit (“Priority 1 participants”) are already 
participating in the BIDC program.  Thus, our proposal calls for all fourteen (14) of the women 
currently participating in the Kona BIDC program to be screened for eligibility for the KWC 
program.  During the course of the proposed two (2) year program, BIDC has approximately 
thirty (30) women designated as Priority 2 participants, which can be assessed for inclusion into 
the KWC program.  This will allow the program to begin providing services to the target 
population immediately, instead of waiting for individual referrals to trickle in for a standalone 
program.  If the pilot program is successful, the ultimate goal would be to expand the women’s 
court program to Hilo and make the program permanent after the end of the 2-year project 
period.    

House Bill No. 727, H.D. 1, Relating to the Women’s Court 
Senate Committee on Judiciary 
 
Wednesday, March 19, 2025 
 
Page 3  
 
 
 
To be successful, the BIWC will require sufficient funding and positions, and a good 
prospect of recruiting qualified staff for those positions.  The Judiciary’s proposal contemplates a 
trauma-informed and gender-responsive program tailored to the unique needs of high-risk 
women, with robust mental health, therapeutic, and rehabilitative components.  The proposal also 
calls for a cultural competency component and staff in peer support roles, with all programing to 
be provided in an atmosphere that holds women accountable while providing court-supervised 
treatment, opportunities, and resources.  
 
A truly trauma-informed approach to this program will require extensive mental health 
counseling by trained psychologists, psychiatrists, and/or mental health counselors.  These 
mental health services are severely deficient on Hawaiʻi Island, where a lack of community-
based mental health providers often proves to be an insurmountable barrier to treatment.  
Moreover, our current BIDC staff are not equipped or sufficiently resourced to address these 
complex issues without comprehensive training.  Thus, our proposal for a KWC has a strong 
focus on the development of mental health services, with the hiring of full-time equivalent 
providers, funding for the creation of new services, and training for program staff. 
 
Similar to other specialty court programs, a one-size-fits-all approach is not always best.  
Circumstances on the neighbor islands may warrant different implementation and different 
resource requirements.  Accordingly, we respectfully request modifications to this measure that 
will allow the attached KWC proposal to be put into action. 
 
The Judiciary has consulted with the sponsors of this bill—Representative Linda 
Ichiyama and Representative Mahina Poepoe—in the development of the attached proposal.  If 
the Legislature is supportive of this proposal, we welcome continued discussions during this 
session.  
 
The Third Circuit and BIDC stand ready to assist the legislature in whatever policy 
decision is made, as long as we have the requested mental health professionals on contract or 
hired by the Judiciary, along with additional staff members to be hired by BIDC. 
 
In addition, given the Third Circuit’s willingness to pilot this modified Women’s Court 
model, we would respectfully request that the Second and Fifth Circuits be deleted from 
consideration for this pilot project, at this time.  
 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony on this important bill.

 
 
 
1 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
KONA WOMEN’S COURT:  
A Proposal for a Women’s Justice and Treatment Program in West Hawaiʻi 
Pilot Program: 2 Years 
 
 
I. 
SUMMARY 
This proposal for the formation of a Kona Women’s Court (“KWC”) program as a 
2-year pilot project. The effective implementation of this proposal would require 
amendments to the current bills that would permit the Third Circuit to implement its 
Women’s Court program under the umbrella of the well-established Big Island Drug Court 
(“BIDC”). By developing KWC under the pre-existing drug court program, the KWC pilot 
project will use the established structures of drug court as its “backbone”, thereby 
enabling the development of a successful program, notwithstanding the practical 
limitations of the Third Circuit’s dual-docket courts. Positioning the KWC program under 
the supervision of drug court will also guarantee the most effective use of resources and 
maximum benefit to the target population of women that the Women’s Court model aims 
to serve. The KWC program requires a critical mass of women participants, and all of the 
fourteen (14) women already participating in Kona BIDC are at high risk for recidivism, 
have high rates of substance abuse, and have high mental health needs. This proposal 
therefore envisions KWC as a division of Kona drug court with distinct eligibility 
requirements, gender-responsive programming, and mental health services and 
treatment options that are specially designed to address the needs of justice-involved 
women in Hawaiʻi Island’s rural community.  
II. 
PURPOSE 
A. Due to Resource Requirements and the Structure of the Circuit Courts in the 
Third Circuit, There Is a Need to Develop the Women’s Court Program under 
the Auspices of Big Island Drug Court. 
The Circuit Courts of the Third Circuit are structured very differently from those in 
the First Circuit. There are only four (4) Circuit Court judges in the Third Circuit, and all of 
them, including the two (2) judges assigned to drug court, are responsible for hearing all 
case types, including all criminal and civil cases, agency appeals, environmental court 
cases, special proceedings, and more. Moreover, due to Hawaiʻi Island’s size, the Third 
Circuit is the only circuit with two courthouses housing Circuit Courts. These courthouses 
are situated nearly 100 miles apart, and each courthouse services distinct geographic 
areas of the island—the Hilo Circuit Court hears cases from East Hawaiʻi, including the 
districts of North and South Hilo, Puna, and Hāmākua, and the Kona Circuit Court hears 
cases from West Hawaiʻi, including the districts of North and South Kona, North and South 
Kohala, and Kaʻū.  
Because of the Circuit Court’s dual-docket calendars and the geography of the 
island, it has never been feasible in the Third Circuit to have single, standalone specialty 
courts dedicated exclusively to the treatment court model, as has been done successfully 
in the First Circuit.  Nevertheless, the Third Circuit has a long history of the successful 

 
 
 
2 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
implementation of the treatment court model in spite of these limitations, beginning with 
the BIDC program. 
Big Island Drug Court is a specialty treatment court first established in the Third 
Circuit over twenty (20) years ago, in 2002. The BIDC program is dedicated to reducing 
recidivism and supporting individuals with substance use disorders and co-occurring 
mental health issues, through a structured, evidence-based approach that integrates 
judicial oversight with intensive treatment, supervision, and accountability measures. 
BIDC operates programs in both Hilo and Kona, and it currently has over 100 participants, 
including twenty-five (25) women, engaged in substance use treatment, frequent drug 
testing, judicial monitoring, group activities, and supportive services designed to promote 
recovery and long-term stability. 
Due to the success of the BIDC program over the years, the Third Circuit also 
implemented a Veterans’ Treatment Court program in 2014, as well as a Juvenile 
Treatment Court program. These programs are not standalone courts, but rather distinct 
programs operated by drug court staff and stationed under the supervision of BIDC. This 
proposal seeks to add a Women’s Court program to the quiver of specialty programming 
offered to probationers in West Hawaiʻi, under the auspices of Kona BIDC. If the pilot 
program is successful, the ultimate goal would be to expand the Women’s Court program 
to Hilo and make the program permanent after the end of the 2-year project period.  
As is so often the case in Hawaiʻi, a one-size-fits-all approach is not always best; 
circumstances on the neighbor islands are unique and differ from those on O‘ahu. But 
with appropriate modifications to the proposed legislation and sufficient funding for 
services and positions, the Third Circuit will nevertheless be able to successfully carry out 
the purposes and intent of the proposed pilot project. By leveraging the existing BIDC 
structure and staff at the outset, the Third Circuit will be able to supplement existing drug 
court services in Kona with the additional services to be provided through this measure—
services that justice-involved women on Hawaiʻi Island desperately need. Through a 
Women’s Court program that is well-tailored to the Third Circuit’s unique court structure, 
and, most importantly, that is responsive to the individual needs of justice-involved 
women, the Judiciary looks forward to the opportunity to participate in this revolutionary 
pilot project.     
B. There Is a Need to Develop Critical Resources and Services in West Hawaiʻi. 
Due to the severe shortage of community-based treatment options on Hawaiʻi 
Island, developing, creating, and sustaining community-wide resources and treatment 
capacity is critical to ensuring the success of the KWC pilot project. The lack of 
community-based mental health services on the island is particularly severe. In 2023, the 
final report of the Adult Mental Health Summit1, held by the Hawaiʻi County Mayor’s Office, 
concluded that there are serious barriers to accessing mental health services island-wide, 
 
1 The Adult Mental Health Summit included participants from a wide-range of community stakeholders, 
including government agencies such as the Department of Health.  

 
 
 
3 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
and that there is a “lack of a comprehensive continuum of care”.2 The group found that in 
Hawaiʻi County, there is a “lack of alternatives to hospitalization or encounters with law 
enforcement when someone is experiencing a [mental health] crisis”, with the shortage 
of mental health providers in the community standing as a significant barrier to accessing 
treatment.3 The group underscored the pressing need for funding to attract mental health 
professionals to Hawaiʻi County and ensure retention.4 
This shortage of community-based providers is particularly acute for justice-
involved women, as the few existing providers are often reluctant to take on patients with 
justice-system involvement. The providers who do take on justice-involved clients already 
have overwhelming caseloads, which hinders their ability to provide timely and consistent 
treatment. The community-based providers available are also located off-site, creating 
practical challenges for patients who may not have access to reliable transportation or 
access to the technology needed for telehealth appointments. These providers also have 
established practices, and their ability to cater to the specific needs of women may be 
limited. 
Only with funding to develop community resources and provide direct services in 
West Hawaiʻi, will KWC be able to address the individualized needs of women with a 
trauma-informed and gender-responsive approach. Accordingly, KWC seeks funding to 
develop services in the following areas through contracted direct services and training for 
KWC staff:  
• Timely Screening of At-Risk Women 
• Mental and Behavioral Health Services, Including Psychiatric Care and 
Medication Management 
• Access to Trauma-Informed Therapies that Meet Individual Needs 
• Substance Use Disorder Treatment 
• Peer Support 
• Housing 
• Cultural Activities and Practices 
• Case Management Services 
• Increased Testing and Laboratory Confirmation  
In addition to the development of these critical services and treatment options for 
KWC clients, program participants would also have access to established Kona drug court 
resources through available community-based services. These existing services can 
provide classes, treatment, and support in the areas of domestic violence, including 
survivor counseling; education and vocational training; life-skill training, such as financial 
literacy classes; and family support resources, including parenting classes and 
 
2 Hawaiʻi County Office of the Mayor (2023). Adult Mental Health Summit August 2023 – Summary 
Report. Retrieved Feb. 11, 2025 from 
<https://www.hawaiicounty.gov/home/showdocument?id=307444&t=638453177631770000>. 
3 Id. 
4 Id. 

 
 
 
4 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
relationship improvement resources. KWC probation officers would coordinate referrals 
to these community-based providers based on a risk-needs assessment.  
The combination of these existing services with the new, direct services proposed 
herein will ensure that Women’s Court clients are receiving the support they truly require 
in light of their particular backgrounds and needs.     
C. The Pilot Program Will Focus on West Hawaii’s Most At-Risk Women, While 
Offering Services to Priority 2 Women When Possible.  
Currently there are fourteen (14) women participating in the BIDC program in 
Kona. These women are considered “Priority 1” clients, meaning they have been 
assessed as having a high risk for recidivism, high rates of substance abuse, and high 
mental health needs. These high-risk women nearly universally have histories of abuse, 
trauma, poverty, and other risk factors that intersect with their involvement in the criminal 
justice system. Women who have been incarcerated are more likely to report extensive 
histories of emotional, physical, and sexual abuse, with between 70% and 90% of 
incarcerated women reporting past abuse.5 To illustrate this reality, of the fourteen (14) 
women currently in Kona drug court, all have a history of trauma, and (13) thirteen have 
a mental health diagnosis. These mental health diagnoses include serious conditions, 
such as major depressive disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder (“PTSD”), bipolar 
disorder, and borderline personality disorder, which require extensive and careful 
treatment and management.    
On Hawaiʻi Island, women confronted with these challenges face unique barriers 
to treatment and recovery—and not only in the area of mental health services. Hawaiʻi 
County is a large, rural county spanning over 4,000 square miles6; many areas of the 
island are remote and have poor or nonexistent access to critical services, such as public 
transportation and medical care. Hawaiʻi County also has the highest poverty rate in the 
State at 13.8%, with an average household income of only $68,3997—with the poorest 
areas of the County having a median household income of only $50,313 per year.8  
Hawaiʻi Island also has high rates of domestic violence. Between 2021 and 2023, 
there was over a 60% increase in the number of participants in programs aimed at the 
 
5 Childhood Trauma and Women’s Health Outcomes in a California Prison Population, PubMed Central 
(Oct. 2006). Retrieved Feb. 11, 2025 from 
<https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1586137/#:~:text=One%20key%20finding%20from%20this,wo
men%20in%20the%20general%20population>. 
6 U.S. Census Bureau (2023). American Community Survey 1-year estimates. Retrieved Feb. 6, 2025 
from Census Reporter Profile page for Hawaii County, 
HI <http://censusreporter.org/profiles/05000US15001-hawaii-county-hi/>. 
7 Hawaiʻi State Data Center, Census Data Highlights (Dec. 8, 2021), Retrieved Feb. 11, 2025 from 
<https://files.hawaii.gov/dbedt/census/acs/acs2021/5yr/ACS21_5yr_highlights.pdf>.  
8 U.S. Census Bureau (2023). American Community Survey 5-year estimates. Retrieved from Census 
Reporter Profile page for Kaʻū CCD, Hawaiʻi County, HI 
<https://censusreporter.org/profiles/06000US1500191170-kau-ccd-hawaii-county-hi/>.  

 
 
 
5 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
prevention of domestic violence.9 Child and Family Services (“CFS”) has reported that 
between 2018 and 2020, one domestic violence shelter in Hawaiʻi County served more 
survivors than any other CFS shelter in the State.10  
The problems of domestic violence, poverty, and a lack of access to employment 
opportunities, transportation, and mental health care are issues that disproportionately 
impact women, who are more likely to be victims of violence and are more likely to have 
dependent children in their care. In consideration of these social realities, closing the 
service gap for the most at-risk women in West Hawaiʻi is imperative.   
Due to their risk-factors, all Priority 1 women currently in Kona drug court would be 
assessed and considered for the expanded, gender-responsive and individualized 
services and programming to be offered through KWC. For the duration of the pilot 
project, any women referred to BIDC or Veteran’s Treatment Court in Kona would also 
be assessed for the Women’s Court program. However, due to the acute lack of 
community-based services on the Big Island, especially in the areas of mental health, the 
KWC staff would also seek to provide services to Priority 2 justice-involved women, who 
have lower risk factors, whenever possible.     
 
Priority 2 women who would be considered for assistance would be women on 
supervision with Hawaiʻi Intake Service Center (“HISC”) and women on regular probation 
in Kona who are not high enough risk or otherwise do not meet the eligibility criteria for 
referral to a treatment court program. These women also experience barriers to treatment 
and lack access to mental health services, including crisis stabilization, which can 
interfere with successful completion of probation. Currently, there are forty-five (45) 
women on supervision with HISC and thirty-seven (37) who are on regular probation 
supervision in Kona, for a total of eighty-two (82) Priority 2 women who could be assessed 
for mental health needs. The actual number of Priority 2 women who would be provided 
with treatment, services, or other interventions, such as trauma treatment, psychiatric 
medication, housing stabilization, case management, and linkages with other community-
based services would be based on the results of individual assessments.  
While the focus of the pilot project is to help the most at-risk women in West 
Hawaiʻi, it is anticipated that KWC staff will be able to provide critical services to many of 
these Priority 2 women, and possibly even to some men, on a case-by-case basis. This 
will ensure that the program’s investments in direct services are utilized to their maximum 
potential and contribute to positive outcomes for the largest number of women.  
D. The Program 
a. Eligibility Criteria & Disqualifications 
The Third Circuit’s vision for Women’s Court aims to utilize best practice standards 
from the treatment court model to address the needs of Priority 1 women in a gender-
responsive format. Because KWC would be built on the foundation of BIDC, there is 
 
9 Domestic violence program enrollments spike on Big Island. West Hawaiʻi Today (Oct. 10, 2023). 
Retrieved on Feb. 11, 2025 from < https://www.westhawaiitoday.com/2023/10/18/hawaii-news/domestic-
violence-program-enrollments-spike-on-big-island/>. 
10 Id.  

 
 
 
6 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
substantial overlap between the proposed eligibility criteria and exclusion factors for KWC 
and those of the drug court program.  
The current, proposed eligibility criteria and disqualification factors for the KWC 
pilot project are as follows: 
1. Proposed Eligibility Criteria: 
• Must be at least eighteen (18) years old; 
• Must reside in area supervised by Kona probation; 
• Must have a history of or evidence of current substance abuse and/or 
mental health issues; 
• Must be convicted of or on status for a felony offense; 
• Must voluntarily agree to participate in Konaa Women’s Court; and  
• Must fully participate in the Kona Women’s Court screening process, 
including the LSI-R and be assessed as high risk for recidivism and as 
having high treatment needs. 
2. Proposed Disqualifications: 
• Convicted of any sex offense that requires or may trigger registration; 
• Convicted of an offense that carries a mandatory prison sentence; 
• Pending charges that would interfere with treatment court participation; 
• Convicted of any previous or pending Class A felony; 
• Convicted of a drug trafficking offense within the last ten (10) years; 
• Is working as a confidential informant; 
• Has been determined by the Kona Women’s Court team to suffer from 
a mental illness or developmental disability that will not allow the 
defendant to complete the program requirements, but only when it is 
also determined that the defendant cannot be stabilized with the 
resources and services available; or 
• Is presently on status for any violent offense, defined as: 
i. Offenses that involve the discharge of a firearm or threat of harm 
with firearm; 
ii. Any offense that involves death or that results in great bodily 
harm to the victim; 
iii. Class B felony violent offenses (other than sexual offenses 
covered above).  

 
 
 
7 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
Consistent with treatment court best practices, the eligibility criteria of BIDC is 
revised periodically to ensure that criteria are in line with current evidence and best 
practices. The eligibility criteria for KWC will also be subject to this periodic revision, to 
ensure that the program is meeting the needs of the target population. As such, the 
foregoing proposed eligibility criteria and exclusion factors are likely to change over time, 
especially if the pilot project is extended beyond the current 2-year proposal.  
b. Referral & Screening Process 
The KWC will accept referrals of women to the program in the same way that 
referrals are currently made to Kona’s BIDC and Veteran’s Treatment Court programs. 
These referrals are made by judges after defendants have been convicted of a crime, and 
while they are pending sentencing. The screening process will utilize best practices, 
including the Level of Service Inventory-Revised (“LSI-R”) assessment tool, which is a 
standardized, evidence-based assessment tool widely used to identify an offender’s risk 
of reoffending and to inform treatment and supervision plans. Because the Third Circuit’s 
Women’s Court structure would situate KWC under the supervision of BIDC, all women 
referred to Kona BIDC or Veteran’s Treatment Court would also be automatically 
screened for eligibility for the KWC program. This allows for maximum flexibility and 
treatment options for high-risk women.  
For example, if a woman is a veteran who would benefit from Veteran’s Court 
programming, upon referral to Kona Veteran’s Court, she would also be assessed for 
KWC eligibility automatically, without the need for an additional referral. If her risk-needs 
assessment shows she would also benefit from the services and programming of KWC, 
the proposed structure of KWC would allow such a woman to take full advantage of both 
programs simultaneously and seamlessly, without needing to choose one or the other.   
c. Court Sessions & Program Activities 
As with other treatment courts, and consistent with treatment court best practices, 
KWC would hold court sessions with the judge and other members of the Women’s Court 
team, where all women admitted to the program would participate approximately twice 
per month. Along with group court hearings, KWC would provide group activities, 
including group therapy, cultural activities, and peer mentorship and support on a regular 
basis. Group sessions with the judge, as well as group programming, are essential to 
building trust in the program and in the justice system. Group programming also builds 
camaraderie and prosocial bonds between participants. These activities are also integral 
to fostering a safe, women-only environment where women can feel secure and 
comfortable sharing openly with their peers and program staff.  
d. Cultural Component 
Best practices dictate that culturally responsive evaluation and treatment planning 
are essential to successful treatment and recovery.11 It is vital that the programming 
 
11 See Improving Cultural Competence. Treatment Improvement Protocol (TIP) Series, No. 59. Center for 
Substance Abuse Treatment (US). Rockville (MD): Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 

 
 
 
8 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
offered by KWC is culturally sensitive and relevant to the needs of the women in the 
program. Over 44% of incarcerated women in Hawaiʻi are Native Hawaiian, despite 
making up only 19.8% of the state’s total female population.12 Therefore, the KWC 
envisions working with Cultural Advisors to make sure that goals and program content 
are culturally relevant to maximize the benefit of the program to Native Hawaiian women 
and women from other marginalized groups.  
   The Cultural Advisors selected will be well versed in dealing with multicultural 
groups of women who come from a variety of backgrounds. They will employ values 
universal to most (if not all) cultures, presented in a Hawaiian way. No particular religion 
will be forced, and the Cultural Advisors and KWC team will be as sensitive to as possible 
to all cultural groups.  
E. Program Evaluation 
Besides Hawaiʻi, there are only a few other jurisdictions in the country that have 
begun Women’s Court programs. As such, there are no established best practices for 
Women’s Court programs. The KWC team will therefore need to thoughtfully implement 
current treatment court best practices in the development of the program, such as the use 
of treatment interventions specific to women’s issues, including treatment for PTSD and 
trauma. Because of the relatively novel nature of this trailblazing project, the program 
evaluation component will be extremely important and will involve careful study.  
It is anticipated that an outside researcher may be invited to do a study on the 
KWC and assist with program evaluation, due to the impacts this program may have on 
national best practice standards. As such, the proposed budget included herein includes 
an amount for program evaluation.   
F. Other Services 
While the focus of the KWC pilot project will be on developing a comprehensive 
Women’s Court Program for Priority 1 women in West Hawaiʻi, the hope is that the 
injection of funding and development of community-based resources through this 
program will benefit other justice-involved individuals, such as Priority 2 women—
especially those needing critical mental health services. These “extracurricular” services 
would be offered on a case-by-case basis when determined appropriate by the KWC 
team, and only when doing so would not detract from the services needed for Priority 1 
women in the KWC program.  
Allowing the flexibility of providing services to individuals outside the KWC program 
will ensure that the resources furnished through this pilot project are being utilized to their 
 
Administration (US); 2014. Retrieved from National Library of Medicine – National Center for 
Biotechnology Information on Feb. 13, 2025 at 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK248423/#:~:text=Just%20as%20culture%20shapes%20an%20i
ndividual's%20sense,be%20aware%20of%20how%20the%20client's%20culture>. 
12 Impact of the Criminal Justice System on Native Hawaiians. OHA Fact Sheet. Retrieved on Feb. 11, 
2025 from <https://www.oha.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/factsheets_final_web_0.pdf>. 

 
 
 
9 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
maximum potential and can be adapted for a variety of individual cases and 
circumstances.    
III. 
The Court’s Structure & Proposed Budget 
A. The Team 
Because the KWC pilot project will use the pre-existing staff and structures of the 
BIDC program to address the needs of women already participating in drug court, the 
KWC team will consist of the dedicated team of BIDC probation officers and staff, as well 
as specially trained professionals in direct service provider positions. Due to the lack of 
community-based service providers on the Big Island, discussed in detail above, funding 
sufficient to recruit and retain full-time mental health professionals, as well as funding for 
adequate training of program staff, are absolutely imperative to the success of the pilot 
project. Only through the development of new services will the KWC be able to guarantee 
that women in the program will have both access to necessary services and consistency 
of treatment.  
Therefore, this proposal seeks funding for the following service provider positions 
and services: 
1. Women’s Mental Health Professional (1FTE) (POS Contractor(s)): KWC 
would seek to hire a Women’s Mental Health Professional. This mental health 
professional would have a full-time equivalent (“FTE”) position and would be 
assigned to the Keahuolū courthouse, to enable them to provide consistent and 
timely mental and behavioral health services. This mental health professional 
would ensure timely screening of at-risk women, including at the jail, at the 
courthouse, or in the community, and they would be able to provide treatment 
directly, including treatment for trauma, substance use disorder, and mental 
health issues specific to women. They would also be available to help stabilize 
justice-involved women, so that the legal process can take place and 
community-based treatments can begin. Additionally, this professional would 
be able to offer medication assisted treatment and a variety of therapies, 
including behavioral therapies, group therapy, and more. Having a dedicated, 
full-time Women’s Mental Health Professional to provide direct services and 
assist clients with referrals and connections with longer-term treatment, crisis 
stabilization, case management, Department of Health services, and other 
community mental health resources is critical to ensuring continuity of care for 
women in the program.  
2. Women’s Behavioral Health Beds (POS Contractor(s)): To facilitate 
effective treatment, recovery, and case management, it is essential to have 
beds available in facilities that will provide support staff to address substance 
use issues and facilitate mental health treatment, including crisis stabilization 
and medication compliance. Currently there are no dual-diagnosis beds 
available to probationers in the Third Circuit. Funding for behavioral health beds 
would ensure that the highest-risk women have access to secure, women-only 
housing where they can receive support for all of their needs. With the funds 

 
 
 
10 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
requested in the proposed budget outlined below, it is anticipated that one of 
the service providers already contracted to provide bedspaces to Kona drug 
court clients will be able to dedicate a house specifically for women in KWC—
with anywhere from three (3) to six (6) bedspaces being reserved for KWC’s 
exclusive use at any given time.  
3. Cultural Practitioner(s) & Advisor(s) (POS Contractor(s)): Best practices 
have long dictated that culturally responsive and culturally relevant evaluation, 
objectives, and treatment result in better outcomes for individuals receiving 
substance abuse and mental health treatment. KWC would utilize Cultural 
Advisors to run cultural activities and group sessions. Cultural Advisors would 
also assist the KWC team to ensure treatment goals and methods are culturally 
relevant, and that individual treatment plans and the services provided by the 
program are sensitive to participants’ backgrounds, beliefs, and practices, to 
the extent possible.  
4. Drug Court Peer Specialist(s) (1FTE) (POS Contractor(s)): Mentorship 
plays a vital role in substance abuse treatment, because it provides a crucial 
layer of support, accountability, and shared experience for individuals in 
addiction recovery. While mentorship is considered a best practice in 
substance abuse treatment, it is particularly critical for women to have access 
to effective mentorship, as studies have shown that women are less 
comfortable talking about substance use than their male counterparts, and less 
likely to seek help or treatment.13 KWC would hire former female drug court 
graduates in peer support roles to ensure that participants in the program 
receive mentorship that is responsive to the unique needs of women.  
In addition to these essential positions, KWC will also seek funding for a Probation 
Supervisor position, as well as for funding for training of KWC staff. 
5. Kona Probation Supervisor (1FTE) (Judiciary Staff): Additional staffing 
within the probation division will be necessary to manage and implement KWC 
deliverables for program participants. There is already an existing gap in Kona 
probation, where the BIDC probation officers currently lack a supervisor. In all 
other probation divisions there is supervisor position for every 3-4 probation 
officers. The added supervision and administrative burdens of an additional 
treatment court program will necessitate that this gap in staffing be addressed.  
6. KWC Staff Training: Within the first year of the pilot project, KWC would seek 
to have its team members participate in available local and online trainings. In 
year two (2) of the program, the Kona team, consisting of up to fifteen (15) team 
 
13 See Women’s barriers to specialty substance abuse treatment: A qualitative exploration of racial/ethnic 
differences. PubMed Central (Aug. 2021). Retrieved on Feb. 13, 2025 from 
<https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7075735/>. 

 
 
 
11 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
members14, would travel to the national All Rise conference. All Rise is the 
national organization for training in the treatment court model15, and it is the 
author of the Adult Treatment Court Best Practice Standards—considered the 
gold standard for treatment courts nationally. Training and conference 
attendance is essential to ensure that the KWC program is implementing 
treatment court best practices, based on the most current evidence available. 
Additionally, as Hawaiʻi is one of the first states in the nation to implement a 
Women’s Court program, conference attendance will provide significant 
opportunities to spread the Women’s Court model to other jurisdictions.    
Finally, the KWC program would seek to contract with vendors and providers to 
provide access to Moral Reconation Therapy (“MRT”) and increased drug testing and 
greater laboratory confirmation capacities. KWC is also seeking funding for technology to 
support program operations, including computer workstations, so that program 
participants can have reliable internet access. 
7. Moral Reconation Therapy & Training (Contracted): KWC will seek to 
contract with therapists who can provide MRT group sessions to program 
participants and train KWC staff in the MRT methodology. MRT is a cognitive 
behavioral therapy designed to address severe criminal thinking. It is effective 
in treating substance abuse, trauma, patterns of domestic violence, and other 
issues that intersect with women’s involvement in criminal behavior. Studies 
have shown that offenders who receive MRT are far less likely to be re-arrested 
or re-incarcerated. One study that tracked nearly 1,400 participants over 20 
years found that the use of MRT reduced the likelihood of an offender being re-
incarcerated by nearly 30%.16  By training the KWC staff in MRT, the program 
can build the capacity to sustainably provide justice-involved women with the 
tools needed to change their thought processes, make better decisions, and 
ultimately reduce recidivism.  
8. Increased Drug Testing & Greater Laboratory Confirmation Capabilities 
(Vendors): Funding for increased capacity and effectiveness of drug testing 
and laboratory confirmation will be essential to monitoring the compliance of 
 
14 Teams would include the KWC probation officers, probation supervisor, assigned judge, service 
providers, and, funding permitted, the assigned Deputy Public Defender, Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, 
and Hawaiʻi Police Department Officer.   
15 All Rise began 30 years ago as the National Association of Drug Court Professionals. In 2023, the 
organization rebranded as “All Rise” to reflect the organization’s focus on all treatment courts, including 
Family Treatment Court, DUI Court, Juvenile Treatment Court, and others.  
16 20-year study finds MRT Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy reduces re-arrests and re-incarceration. GEO 
Reentry Services (Sept. 30, 2011). Retrieved Feb. 13, 2025 from <https://www.georeentry.com/20-year-
study-finds-mrt-cognitive-behavioral-therapy-reduces-re-arrests-and-re-
incarceration/#:~:text=After%2020%20years%2C%2094%25%20of,rate%20dropped%20significantly%20
to%2061%25>. 

 
 
 
12 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
women in the KWC program and ensuring effectiveness of treatment. With the 
integration of critical mental health services and treatment through the pilot 
project, program staff will need the ability to confirm compliance with psychiatric 
and other prescribed medication through laboratory testing. The use of sweat 
patches and Smartstart technology for KWC will also ensure that participants 
can be adequately monitored for compliance with drug and alcohol conditions 
while in the community, when standard urine testing is not practical. For 
example, if a client needs to travel the mainland for medical treatment, currently 
there is no way to monitor her compliance during the travel period. With a sweat 
patch, the client’s probation officer would be able to verify compliance. 
9. Technology: As set forth in the proposed program budget below, funding is 
being sought for technology to support program operations, including 
computers for additional staff, as well as a computer workstation in the Kona 
probation waiting area. This workstation would be available for clients to use 
for job applications and searches, applications to educational and training 
programs, housing applications, and similar, essential administrative tasks. 
Many justice-involved women in our rural community lack reliable access to the 
internet at home. Internet access is required to do the most basic of tasks in 
our modern, digital world. Having computers available so that program 
participants have guaranteed access to the internet every time they come to 
court would be a significant step to closing this digital divide.   
B. 2-Year Pilot Program Budget 
 
Two-Year Pilot Program Budget: 
 
 
 
 
Year 1
Year 2
Services
Annual Cost
Annual Cost
n
Total Cost
Women's Mental Health Professional (1FTE)
175,000.00
$                
175,000.00
$               
350,000.00
$                 
Womens Behavioral  Health Beds
100,000.00
$                
100,000.00
$               
200,000.00
$                 
Kona Drug Court  Probation Supervisor (1FTE)
85,000.00
$                  
85,000.00
$                 
170,000.00
$                 
Cultural Practitioner and Advisor
30,000.00
$                  
30,000.00
$                 
60,000.00
$                   
Peer Specialist (1FTE)
80,000.00
$                  
80,000.00
$                 
160,000.00
$                 
Moral Reconation Therapy
25,000.00
$                  
25,000.00
$                 
50,000.00
$                   
Increased Drug Testing/Lab confirmation
10,000.00
$                  
10,000.00
$                 
20,000.00
$                   
Training
5,000.00
$                    
42,000.00
$                 
47,000.00
$                   
Technology
4,900.00
$                    
-
$                              
4,900.00
$                      
Program Evaluation
-
$                               
10,000.00
$                 
10,000.00
$                   
Total
514,900.00
$                
557,000.00
$               
1,071,900.00
$             

 
 
 
13 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
Breakdown of Estimated Training Costs: 
 
 
Breakdown of Estimated Technology Costs: 
 
 
Training:
Cost
Year 1:  Local and Other Trainings
$5,000
Year 2:  Kona Team : All Rise National Conference 
(Washington DC)
42,000.00
$          
Total Training Cost:
$47,000
Technology:
Kona Cost
Computer Workstation (in Probation Waiting A
1,200.00
$           
Computer for Kona Probation Supervisor
1,000.00
$           
Printer for Kona Probation Supervisor
1,000.00
$           
Cellphone for Field Work Kona Prob . Sup
500.00
$               
Kona Laptop for Work in Rural Communities
1,200.00
$           
Total:
4,900.00
$           

JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
 GOVERNOR OF HAWAII 
KE KIAʻĀINA O KA MOKUʻĀINA ʻO HAWAIʻI 
KENNETH S. FINK, M.D., M.G.A, M.P.H 
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH 
KA LUNA HOʻOKELE 
 
STATE OF HAWAII 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 
KA ʻOIHANA OLAKINO 
P. O. Box 3378 
Honolulu, HI  96801-3378 
doh.testimony@doh.hawaii.gov 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony in SUPPORT of HB727 HD1 
RELATING TO THE WOMEN’S COURT  
SENATOR KARL RHOADS, CHAIR 
SENATOR MIKE GABBARD, VICE CHAIR 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY 
 
Hearing Date and Time: March 19, 2025,9:45 a.m. Location: Room 016 & Video 
 
Fiscal Implications: The Department of Health (“Department”) requests funding for this 
1 
measure be considered as a vehicle to expand services, including staff support, provided it does 
2 
not supplant the requests outlined in the Governor's executive budget request. 
3 
Department Position: The Department supports this measure and offers comments.  
4 
Department Testimony:  The Adult Mental Health Division provides the following testimony on 
5 
behalf of the Department. 
6 
The Department supports this measure which proposes to establish a three-year 
7 
Women’s Court pilot program in the circuit court of the second and fifth circuits. The measure 
8 
also requires the third circuit of the Judiciary and Big Island Drug Court to conduct an interim 
9 
study to establish a blueprint for a women's court pilot program in the third circuit. The intent 
10 
of the project is to implement trauma informed and evidence-based practices, employ gender-
11 
responsive programming, collaborate with stakeholders, and provide services to women in the 
12 
court system with the goal of diverting participants from incarceration, supporting their success 
13 
in the community, and reducing recidivism. 
14 

HB727 HD1 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
 
Mohala Wahine, which was established in the first circuit by Act 243, SLH 2022, has 
1 
been operational since January 2023. In 2024, through our collaborative partnership with the 
2 
Judiciary, the Department conducted 33 mental health screenings and 24 psychological 
3 
assessments of participants for the program. The services offered by the program are 
4 
comprehensive and provide an opportunity for participants to achieve meaningful and lasting 
5 
recovery. The Department defers to the Judiciary on the feasibility of a pilot project and study 
6 
implementation. 
7 
Offered Amendments:  The Department requests a budget of $801,802, which is based on the 
8 
Department’s staffing requirements for the operation of the existing Women’s Court pilot 
9 
project of the First Circuit. Each circuit would require the following: 
10 
1.0 FTE Clinical Psychologist [$145,000] to conduct psychological assessments 
11 
1.0 FTE Social Worker/Human Services Professional IV [$76,788] to conduct screenings 
12 
1.0 FTE Social Services Assistant V [$45,216] to provide peer support 
13 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this measure. 
14 

 
 
                                                                                   
                                                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
March 17, 2025  
 
 
 
H.B. No. 727, HD 1: RELATING TO THE WOMEN’S COURT 
 
Chair Rhoads, Vice-Chair Gabbard, and Members of the Committee: 
 
The Office of the Public Defender strongly supports HB 727, HD1.  This bill 
establishes a three-year women’s court pilot program in the Second and Fifth 
circuits, and requires the Third to conduct an interim study to establish a blueprint 
for a women’s court pilot program.  The Office of the Public Defender regularly 
represents women in the criminal legal system and knows first-hand the unique 
needs and issues facing these clients.  Often their involvement in the criminal legal 
system is directly related to trauma, abuse, or unhealthy relationships, and they 
would greatly benefit from gender-responsive programming.   
 
The implementation of the women’s court program in the first circuit, known as 
Mohala Wahine, has been thus far successful, with the Office of the Public Defender 
representing most of the participants in the program.   The collaboration with the 
court, the prosecutor’s office, probation department, and service providers has 
allowed the women to receive focused services with the support and resources 
necessary to obtain positive outcomes.  
 
Expansion to the other circuits would allow the program to assist more women in 
need and divert them away from incarceration.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this measure. 
 
 
 
 
JON N. IKENAGA 
                     PUBLIC DEFENDER 
 
DEFENDER COUNCIL 
1130 NORTH NIMITZ HIGHWAY 
SUITE A-254 
HONOLULU, HAWAI‘I  96817 
 
HONOLULU OFFICE 
1130 NORTH NIMITZ HIGHWAY 
SUITE A-254 
HONOLULU, HAWAI‘I  96817 
 
APPELLATE DIVISION 
TEL. NO. (808) 586-2080 
 
 DISTRICT COURT DIVISION 
TEL. NO. (808) 586-2100 
 
FAMILY COURT DIVISION 
TEL. NO. (808) 586-2300 
 
FELONY DIVISION 
TEL. NO. (808) 586-2200 
 
FACSIMILE 
 (808) 586-2222 
HAYLEY Y. C. CHENG 
                ASSISTANT PUBLIC DEFENDER  
 
HILO OFFICE 
275 PONAHAWAI STREET 
SUITE 201 
HILO, HAWAI‘I   96720 
TEL. NO.  (808) 974-4571 
FAX NO.  (808) 974-4574 
 
KONA OFFICE 
75-1000 HENRY STREET  
SUITE #209 
KAILUA-KONA HI   96740 
TEL. NO.  (808) 327-4650 
FAX NO.  (808) 327-4651 
 
KAUA`I OFFICE 
3060 EIWA STREET 
 SUITE 206 
LIHUE, HAWAI‘I  96766 
TEL. NO.  (808) 241-7128 
FAX NO.  (808) 274-3422 
 
MAUI OFFICE 
81 N. MARKET STREET 
WAILUKU, HAWAI‘I  96793 
TEL. NO.  (808) 984-5018 
FAX NO.  (808) 984-5022 
STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
OFFICE OF THE PUBLIC DEFENDER 

 
 
STATE COUNCIL ON MENTAL HEALTH 
Testimony to the Senate Committee on Judiciary 
In Support of H.B. 727 H.D.1 
RELATING TO THE WOMEN’S COURT 
March 19, 2025  9:45 a.m., Room 016 and Video 
 
Chair Rhoads, Vice Chair Gabbard, and Members of the Committee: 
 
Hawaii law, HRS §334-10, established the State Council on Mental 
Health (SCMH) as a 21-member body to advise on the allocation of 
resources, statewide needs, and programs affecting more than one county as 
well as to advocate for adults with serious mental illness, children with 
serious emotional disturbances, individuals with mental illness or emotional 
problems, including those with co-occurring substance abuse disorders. 
Members are residents from diverse backgrounds representing mental 
health service providers and recipients, students and youth, parents, and 
family members. Members include representatives of state agencies on 
mental health, criminal justice, housing, Medicaid, social services, vocational 
rehabilitation, and education. Members include representatives from the 
Hawaii Advisory Commission on Drug Abuse and Controlled Substances and 
county service area boards on mental health and substance abuse. 
 
Most of the State Council on Mental Health members support this 
measure. HB727 HD1 seeks to address the needs in Maui, Hawaii, and Kauai 
counties. The Women’s Court is one of the specialty courts that can be life-
changing for people with mental illness or substance use disorders who 
become involved in the criminal justice system. The Women’s Court will 
primarily address those who suffer from high trauma. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.  Should you have any 
questions, please contact us at DOH.SCMHChairperson@doh.hawaii.gov. 
 
VISION: A Hawaii where people of all ages with mental health challenges can enjoy recovery in the community of their choice. 
 
MISSON: To advocate for a Hawaii where all persons affected by mental illness can access necessary treatment and support to 
live full lives in the community of their choice. 
JOSH B. GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR OF HAWAII 
KE KIAʻĀINA O KA 
 MOKUʻĀINA ʻO HAWAIʻI 
 
 
 
 
KATHERINE AUMER, PhD 
COUNCIL CHAIRPERSON 
LUNA HOʻOMALU O KA PAPA 
 
 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAIʻI 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 
KA ʻOIHANA OLAKINO 
STATE COUNCIL ON MENTAL HEALTH 
P.O. Box 3378, Room 256 
HONOLULU, HAWAII  96801-3378 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAIRPERSON 
      Katherine Aumer, PhD 
 
1st VICE CHAIRPERSON 
      Kathleen Merriam, LCSW 
CSAC 
 
2nd VICE CHAIRPERSON 
      John Betlach 
 
SECRETARY 
     Mary Pat Waterhouse, MHA 
MBA 
 
MEMBERS: 
Tianna Celis-Webster 
Naomi Crozier, CPS 
Lea Dias, MEd 
Jon Fujii, MBA 
Heidi Ilyavi 
Jackie Jackson, CFPS 
Christine Montague-Hicks. MEd 
Ray Rice, MEd 
Asianna Saragosa-Torres 
Forrest Wells, MSCP, LMHC 
Kristin Will, MACL, CSAC 
 
EX-OFFICIO: 
Marian Tsuji, Deputy Director 
Behavioral Health 
Administration 
 
 
WEBSITE: 
scmh.hawaii.gov 
 
EMAIL ADDRESS: 
doh.scmhchairperson@ 
doh.hawaii.gov 
 

RICHARD T. BISSEN, JR. 
Mayor 
 
ANDREW H. MARTIN 
Prosecuting Attorney 
 
SHELLY C. MIYASHIRO 
First Deputy Prosecuting Attorney 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE PROSECUTING ATTORNEY 
COUNTY OF MAUI 
200 SOUTH HIGH STREET 
WAILUKU, MAUI, HAWAI’I  96793 
           PHONE (808) 270-7777  •  FAX (808) 270-7625 
 
TESTIMONY ON 
H.B. 727 HD1 
RELATING TO THE WOMEN’S COURT 
 
March 15, 2025 
 
 
 
 
The Honorable Karl Rhoads 
Chair 
The Honorable Mike Gabbard 
Vice Chair 
and Members of the Committee on Judiciary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chair Rhoads, Vice Chair Gabbard, and Members of the Committee: 
 
The Department of the Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui respectfully submits the 
following comments in support of H.B. 727 HD1, Relating to the Women’s Court. This bill 
would, inter alia, establish a three-year women’s court pilot program in the second and fifth 
circuits. 
 
 
The Department of the Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui supports this bill because it 
would provide a needed alternative to incarceration for women within the second circuit, 
particularly women with a high risk of recidivism and in need of services in addition to the 
substance abuse treatment already provided by the Maui Drug Court. We also support the 
program’s use of trauma-informed and evidence-based practices. 
 
 
For these reasons, the Department of the Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui supports 
H.B. 727 HD1.  Please feel free to contact our office at (808) 270-7777 if you have any 
questions or inquiries. 
 
 
Thank you very much for the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill. 
 

KIMO ALAMEDA  
County of Hawai’i 
KELDEN B.A. WALTJEN 
     Mayor                                                             COMMITTEE ON THE STATUS OF WOMEN                                       Prosecuting Attorney 
 
O/ice of the Prosecuting Attorney 
655 Kilauea Avenue ! Hilo, HI  96720 
(808) 961-0466 ! Fax (808) 961-8908 
 
 
Testimony Presented Before the  
Committee on Judiciary 
Wednesday, March 19, 2025, at 9:45 a.m. 
By 
Farrah-Marie Gomes, Ph.D., Committee Member 
Hawai‘i County Committee on the Status of Women 
 
 
HB 727 HD1 – RELATING TO THE WOMEN’S COURT 
 
Aloha Chair Rhoads, Vice Chair Gabbard, and Members of the Committee: 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of HB 727 HD 1 relating to the 
Women’s Court. This measure would establish a temporary three-year women's court 
pilot program within the Second and Fifth Circuits, require the Third Circuit of the 
Judiciary and Big Island Drug Court to conduct an interim study to establish a blueprint 
for a women's court pilot program in the Third Circuit, require reports, establish temporary 
positions, and appropriate funds. 
Established by HRS§367-4, the Hawai‘i County Committee on the Status of Women 
(HCCSW) is charged with the duty and responsibility of developing information as the 
state commission on the status of women requires or as the committee deems advisable 
concerning the status of women within Hawai‘i County; and other appropriate duties and 
responsibilities as may be deemed necessary. To this end, the HCCSW defers to the 
Judiciary as the subject matter expert on the details of this measure and provides this 
testimony in support for the following reasons.  
 
The HCCSW, in advocacy for Hawai‘i Island women who could benefit from this 
measure, sees this program as an alternative to incarceration for women and as 
importantly, supporting Hawai‘i Island mothers, daughters, sisters, and friends. As a 
result of different life situations due to trauma, abuse, unhealthy relationships and more, 
many women on Hawai‘i Island are in need of substance abuse treatment, mental health 
support, and assistance with navigating the criminal and social services systems.  
 
With this measure, we ask that the vastness of Hawai‘i Island, also known as the Big 
Island, be kept in mind. We encourage adequate support and funding for proper 
implementation to ensure access across the entire island. 
 
Thank you for this opportunity to provide testimony on this measure that has great 
potential for assisting Hawai‘i Island women in need. 
 

 
 
 
Hawai’i County is an Equal Opportunity Provider and Employer 
 
 
 
KELDEN B.A. WALTJEN 
PROSECUTING ATTORNEY 
 
SHANNON M. KAGAWA 
FIRST DEPUTY 
PROSECUTING ATTORNEY 
 
655 KILAUEA AVENUE 
HILO, HAWAI‘I 96720 
PH: (808) 961-0466 
FAX: (808) 961-8908 
 
74-675 KEALAKEHE PARKWAY 
KAILUA-KONA, HAWAI‘I  96740 
PH: (808) 322-2552 
FAX: (808) 322-6584 
 
64-1067 MAMALAHOA HIGHWAY, C-3 
KAMUELA, HAWAI‘I 96743 
PH: (808) 887-3017 
FAX: (808) 887-3016 
OFFICE OF THE PROSECUTING ATTORNEY 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF HOUSE BILL NO. 727 H.D. 1  
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT  
RELATING TO WOMEN’S COURT 
  
COMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY  
Senator Karl Rhoads, Chair 
Senator Mike Gabbard, Vice Chair 
 
Wednesday, March 19, 2025 at 9:45 a.m. 
Via Videoconference and   
State Capitol Conference Room 016 
415 South Beretania Street 
 
Honorable Chair Rhoads, Vice-Chair Gabbard, and Members of the Committee on 
Judiciary, the County of Hawai‘i, Office of the Prosecuting Attorney submits the following 
testimony in support of House Bill No. 727, H.D. 1. 
 
House Bill No. 727, H.D. 1 establishes a temporary three-year women’s court pilot 
program within the Second and Fifth Circuits, requires the Third Circuit of the Judiciary and Big 
Island Drug Court to conduct an interim study to establish a blueprint for a women’s court pilot 
program in the Third Circuit, requires reports, establishes temporary positions, appropriates 
funds necessary to accomplish these goals. 
 
The mission of the Hawai‘i’s Women’s Court, now referred to as Mohala Wahine, is to 
assist and guide the participants in meeting their legal and statutory responsibilities and to 
facilitate change in the participants well-being by providing gender-responsive services that 
upholds the mission of the Hawai‘i State Judiciary and the Adult Client Services Branch.  
Additionally, Mohala Wahine will seek to enhance community safety by reducing recidivism 
through evidenced-based, trauma-informed care, and cultural practices. 
 
Hawaiʻi Island is at a substantial disadvantage to address crime motivators such as 
substance abuse, mental health, and homelessness, given our limited community resources and 
funding, geographic restrictions, limitations of court supervision authorities, overcrowded 
correctional facilities, understaffed law enforcement, and shortage of direct service providers. By 
supporting funding and staffing, for programs like Mohala Wahine which incorporates intensive 
case management and supervision, psychoeducational group work, community engagement, and 
aftercare and commencement, we hope to address jail overcrowding concerns, assist incarcerated 
persons reintegrating back into society, and reduce recidivism. 
 

 
2
For the foregoing reasons, the County of Hawai‘i, Office of the Prosecuting Attorney 
supports the passage of House Bill No. 727, H.D. 1. Thank you for the opportunity to testify on 
this matter.  
 

 
 
HB727 HD1 Women’s Court 
COMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY 
Senator Karl Rhoads, Chair 
Senator Mike Gabbard, Vice Chair 
Wednesday, Mar 19, 2025: 9:45: Room 016 Videoconference 
 
 
 
Hawaii Substance Abuse Coalition Supports HB727 HD1: 
 
ALOHA CHAIR, VICE CHAIR, AND DISTINGUISHED COMMITTEE MEMBERS. My 
name is Alan Johnson. I am the current chair of the Hawaii Substance Abuse Coalition 
(HSAC), a statewide organization for substance use disorder and co-occurring mental 
health disorder treatment and prevention agencies and recovery-oriented services. 
 
 
HSAC supports a 3-year pilot program and interim study for a gender responsive 
approach to women who are justice-involved. 
 
Recovery can be complex because recovery involves a multitude of issues such as 
trauma, substance use disorder, mental illness, unhealthy relationships, domestic 
violence, sexual assault, and family law disputes. Courts can ensure a collaboration 
with multiple providers to implement evidenced-based behavioral health practices to 
support their full recovery and not return to incarceration.   
Formal substance abuse with mental illness treatment, 
such as residential and intensive outpatient, is still the 
most effective approach to achieve functionality and 
lasting recovery for justice-involved women.  
 
Substance use disorder coupled with mental health treatment is essential for 
offenders because it addresses the underlying issues that often contribute to criminal 
behavior and helps break the cycle of addiction and recidivism. Gender-responsive 
women’s courts are effective because they address the unique needs and challenges 
women face: 
 
1. Trauma-Informed Approach. Women’s courts often adopt trauma-
informed practices, ensuring that the court process is sensitive to the 
emotional, psychological, and physical impact of trauma on survivors. This 
fosters an environment where women feel safe, heard, and respected. 

  
2. High Rates of Substance Abuse Among Offenders: Many offenders 
struggle with substance use disorders. Studies show that a significant 
proportion of crimes, including theft, assault, and drug-related offenses, are 
committed under the influence of drugs or alcohol. 
 
3. Addresses Root Causes of Criminal Behavior: Substance abuse often 
coexists with mental health issues, trauma, or socioeconomic challenges. 
Treatment programs can provide a comprehensive approach to addressing 
these interconnected factors. Treating substance abuse can lower the 
likelihood of reoffending. Offenders who receive effective treatment are more 
likely to develop coping skills and lead crime-free lives after release. 
 
4. Specialized Training for Judges and Staff: Judges, attorneys, and court 
staff in women’s courts typically receive specialized training in gender 
dynamics, domestic violence, and trauma. This equips them to make 
informed, fair decisions and avoid perpetuating biases or re-traumatizing 
survivors. 
 
5. Integrated Social Services: Women’s courts often partner with social 
services, offering survivors access to counseling, housing assistance, legal aid, 
childcare, and job training. This holistic approach addresses the underlying 
issues that women face, helping them rebuild their lives. 
 
6. Empowering Women: By creating a supportive and understanding 
environment, women’s courts help survivors regain confidence, independence, 
and control over their lives, encouraging long-term recovery and stability 
while simultaneously holding perpetrators accountable while ensuring victim 
safety. 
 
This focused approach ensures that justice-involved women are given an opportunity 
to rebuild their lives, contributing positively to society rather than being trapped in 
cycles of crime and incarceration. 
 
We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony and are available for questions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

HB-727-HD-1 
Submitted on: 3/18/2025 9:25:14 AM 
Testimony for JDC on 3/19/2025 9:45:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Kori Weinberger 
Testifying for West 
Hawaii Bar Association 
Support 
Remotely Via 
Zoom 
 
 
Comments:  
Dear Chair Rhoads, Vice Chair Gabbard, and Members of this Honorable Committee,  
As the Vice-President of the West Hawaii Bar Association and a former Drug Court prosecutor, I 
fully support the Third Circuit's proposal for the creation of a women's court program in Kona. 
The Big Island does not have a functioning mental health system. The lack of providers here 
means that even people like myself, with a good salary and benefits, struggle to find care locally. 
This lack of providers means that people who are struggling financially or who find themselves 
in a mental health crisis often have nowhere to go. These challenges can be insurmountable for 
many criminal defendants with mental health needs, and the impact on justice-involved women, 
who are often the sole caregivers to dependent children, can be catastrophic.   
The proposal for a women's court in Kona would mean that new mental health providers 
could be attracted to the community, and these providers would be able to provide care to many 
women through the treatment court model. As a former drug court prosecutor, I have seen 
firsthand how effective the treatment court model can be.  
I fully support the Third Circuit's proposal for a women's court pilot project in Kona, and would 
humbly ask this committee to allow this program to move forward and provide the funding for 
the mental health providers that this community so desperately needs. 
Thank you for your time and for the opportunity to testify on this bill.  
/s/ Kori Weinberger 
 

COMMUNITY ALLIANCE ON PRISONS 
P.O. Box 37158, Honolulu, HI 96837-0158 
Phone/E-Mail:  (808) 927-1214 / kat.caphi@gmail.com 
 
Today’s Inmate; Tomorrow’s Neighbor 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY 
Senator Karl Rhoads, Chair 
Senator Mike Gabbard, Vice Chair 
Wednesday, March 18, 2025 
Room 016 & VIDEOCONFERENCE 
9:45 AM 
 
STRONG SUPPORT FOR HB 727 HD1 – WOMEN’S COURT 
 
Aloha Chair Rhoads, Vice Chair Gabbard and Members of the Committee! 
 
My name is Kat Brady and I am the Coordinator of Community Alliance on Prisons, a 
community initiative promoting smart justice policies in Hawai`i for more than two decades. This 
testimony is respectfully offered on behalf of the 3,720 Hawai`i individuals living behind bars1 
and under the “care and custody” of the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation as of 
March 10, 2025. We are always mindful that 936 – 49.3% - of Hawai`i’s male prison population 
(1,895) are serving their sentences abroad -- thousands of miles away from their loved ones, their 
homes and, for the disproportionate number of incarcerated Kanaka Maoli, far, far from their 
ancestral lands. 
 
Mahalo for the opportunity to show our strong support for HB 727 HD1 that establishes a 
3-year women’s court project pilot program within the 2nd and 5th Circuit.  It requires the 3rd 
Circuit and the Hawai`i Island Drug Court to conduct the an interim study to establish a blueprint 
for a women’s court pilot program in the 3rd Circuit. 
 
This bill acknowledges that women’s pathways to incarceration are different and we are, 
therefore, happy to see trauma-informed and gender-responsivity being the focus for this court. 
 
Judge Kim from Hawai`i Island has been at hearings helping O`ahu legislators understand 
the resource challenges of our neighbor islands. We know we don’t have enough programs and 
services on O`ahu; this is magnified on our outer islands.  
 
Community Alliance on Prisons commends Judge Kim for his belief that we can do more 
and his willingness to find ways to serve the people on our neighbor islands!  Imua, Judge Kim! 
 
We hope that WAM funds this important effort and that Hawai`i will reduce our current 
population of incarcerated women - 402 (10.8% of Hawai`i’s incarcerated population) 
substantially!    
 
Mahalo nui! 
 
1 DCR Weekly Population Report, March 10, 2025 
https://dcr.hawaii.gov/wp-content/uploads/2025/03/Pop-Reports-Weekly-2025-03-10.pdf 
 
 	

HB-727-HD-1 
Submitted on: 3/16/2025 12:09:45 PM 
Testimony for JDC on 3/19/2025 9:45:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Colleen Rost-Banik 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Dear Committee on the Judiciary, 
My name is Colleen Rost-Banik. I am a Sociology instructor at University of Hawaii, Manoa, 
and I facilitate a creative writing class at the Women's Community Correctional Center. I 
strongly support HB727, which establishes a pilot program of the Women's Court, with the 
expansion to neighbor islands. Having worked with numerous women at WCCC, I have heard 
countless stories about the challenging situations that they have had to navigate as 
victims/survivors of abuse while also trying to care for their children. Sometimes all of this is on 
top of substance addiction, often used as a coping strategy for the trauma they've experienced. 
Suffice it to say that many of the women who are incarcerated have lives that are extremely 
complicated. Women's Court is designed to take these complexities into consideration. Please 
support HB727. It will be a step toward ensuring the betterment of Hawaii's women and their 
families. 
Mahalo for your consideration. 
Colleen Rost-Banik, Ph.D. 
 

HB-727-HD-1 
Submitted on: 3/16/2025 3:10:56 PM 
Testimony for JDC on 3/19/2025 9:45:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Carla Allison 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I strongly support HB727 HD1. 
 

 
Aloha my name is Genesis Kepo’o. I am writing in support of HB 727, relating to the 
importance of a Women’s Court, here on the island of Hawai’i. 
 
I am originally from the island of Kaua’I and moved to Hawaii island in 2002. I am the 
oldest of 3 and as such the burden of taking care of my younger siblings fell to me at a 
young age. Having to “grow up” at a young age, I got caught up with experimentation during 
middle & high school.  
 
For most of my adult life I used off and on, until I couldn’t. I found myself being 
arrested and having to navigate my way through the judicial system. I attempted to comply 
with regular probationary rules but found I just couldn’t stay clean. During a revocation that 
had me spend 30 days in jail, I heard about Drug Court. Of course, it was “don’t do it,” 
“you’ll never be able to get out of it,” and so on.  
 
I was ready to be done and move on with my life so when my probation officer 
brought up Drug Court, I jumped at the chance. I needed someone to hold me accountable 
and keep me on the right track. I graduated in May 2023 and have been able to remain 
clean. Drug Court helps to get you the tools you need to lead an honest & productive life. 
Since then, I have worked in a treatment center and currently work in the mental health 
field.  
 
HB 727 is important to bring awareness to individual needs and how to lower 
recidivism. Women are hard wired to take on others’ problems, stress, feelings, you name 
it, we want to fix it for you. With that mentality, anyone would crack. Women require more 
support whether we know it or not. By creating a Women’s court, it would reduce the 
number of women in jail, keeping families together. Having Women’s Mental & Behavioral 
Health available to help with SUD and mental health issues will help destigmatize getting 
help. There’s nothing wrong with needing help, having it available would make it easier to 
get. It would create a safe place to find help. 
 
There is nothing better than being able to talk with someone you know has come 
from similar situations as you and made it through the dark tunnel, back into the sun. Peer 
support and getting back to your roots are by far some of the best therapy there can be. 
Someone who can help you through those dark times by showing you the way. Recentering 
and getting back into cultural practices with a knowledgeable teacher can do more for 
mind, body, & spirit. For both women and men! 
 
Please support HB 727, relating to Women’s Court. 
 
Mahalo, 
Genesis L E Kepo’o 

HB-727-HD-1 
Submitted on: 3/18/2025 8:54:45 AM 
Testimony for JDC on 3/19/2025 9:45:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Rachel Thompson 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Dear Chair Rhoads, Vice Chair Gabbard, and Committee Members: 
I write in strong support of HB 727, which seeks to establish a Women’s Court pilot program in 
Kona within the Third Circuit Judiciary.  
As a Deputy Public Defender serving justice-involved individuals on the Big Island, I have 
witnessed firsthand the challenges that women face in the criminal justice system—challenges 
that this bill seeks to address. 
Women involved in the justice system, particularly those struggling with substance use, trauma, 
and economic hardship, have vastly different needs than their male counterparts. Yet, our system 
is not designed to provide the gender-specific support necessary to break cycles of incarceration.  
The proposed Women’s Court would create much needed programs,  focused on treatment, 
rehabilitation, and alternatives to incarceration, ensuring that justice-involved women receive 
trauma-informed, culturally appropriate, and community-based interventions.  This proposal 
would provide a cost effective pathway to healing and restoration, rather than expensive and 
ineffective incarceration, offering services such as mental health and substance use treatment, 
housing assistance, and family reunification support. 
By reducing recidivism and prioritizing rehabilitation over incarceration, HB 727 will increase 
public safety and strengthen our community. I respectfully urge this committee to pass HB 727 
and invest in meaningful solutions that will improve outcomes for justice-involved women. 
Mahalo for your time and consideration. I appreciate your commitment to equitable justice, and I 
am available for any further discussion. 
Sincerely, 
Rachel L. Thompson 
 

HB-727-HD-1 
Submitted on: 3/18/2025 9:05:14 AM 
Testimony for JDC on 3/19/2025 9:45:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Nicole Hazlett 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Dear Chair Rhoads, Vice Chair Gabbard, and Committee Members: 
I write in strong support of HB 727, which seeks to establish a Women’s Court pilot program in 
Kona within the Third Circuit Judiciary. 
As a Deputy Public Defender serving justice-involved individuals on the Big Island, I have 
witnessed firsthand the challenges that women face in the criminal justice system—challenges 
that this bill seeks to address. 
Women involved in the justice system, particularly those struggling with substance use, trauma, 
and economic hardship, have vastly different needs than their male counterparts. Yet, our system 
is not designed to provide the gender-specific support necessary to break cycles of incarceration. 
The proposed Women’s Court would create much needed programs, focused on treatment, 
rehabilitation, and alternatives to incarceration, ensuring that justice-involved women receive 
trauma-informed, culturally appropriate, and community-based interventions. This proposal 
would provide a cost effective pathway to healing and restoration, rather than expensive and 
ineffective incarceration, offering services such as mental health and substance use treatment, 
housing assistance, and family reunification support. 
By reducing recidivism and prioritizing rehabilitation over incarceration, HB 727 will increase 
public safety and strengthen our community. I respectfully urge this committee to pass HB 727 
and invest in meaningful solutions that will improve outcomes for justice-involved women. 
Mahalo for your time and consideration. I appreciate your commitment to equitable justice, and I 
am available for any further discussion. 
Nicole L. Hazlett 
Deputy Public Defender 
 

HB-727-HD-1 
Submitted on: 3/18/2025 9:25:37 AM 
Testimony for JDC on 3/19/2025 9:45:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Emily Ovian-Kwiat 
Individual 
Support 
In Person 
 
 
Comments:  
I am in full support of HB 727, Women's Court in Kailua-Kona. I have been a Drug Court 
Probation Officer for approximately seven years. I have worked directly with justice involved 
women and have seen the need for these types of services in our community. 
 

HB-727-HD-1 
Submitted on: 3/18/2025 9:30:45 AM 
Testimony for JDC on 3/19/2025 9:45:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Katherine Knezek May 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
My name is Katherine Knezek May (PsychD, CSAC), and I am submitting testimony in strong 
support of HB 727, relating to a Women’s Court on the Big Island. 
I have been a mental health and substance use treatment provider on Hawai'i Island for over 14 
years and have worked closely with Big Island Drug Court, currently serving on the Board for 
the Friends of Big Island Drug Court.   I have seen the positive impact that focused court systems 
can offer, but also the need for an increased focus on trauma informed systems within the justice 
system. This is particularly important for women who are justice involved, who often have 
experienced a disproportionate amount of trauma in their lives.  
HB 727 would help establish a space where women can engage with the justice system in a more 
supportive environment, resuling in improved outcomes for the community in addition to making 
a difference to the lives of women in the justice system. 
I ask lawmakers to approve this pilot program with HB 727.  
  
Mahalo for your consideration, 
Katherine Knezek May 
Clinical Psychologist 
 

HB-727-HD-1 
Submitted on: 3/18/2025 9:39:56 AM 
Testimony for JDC on 3/19/2025 9:45:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Andi Pawasarat-Losalio 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Chairperson and Members of the Committee, 
 
I am submitting testimony in strong support of House Bill 727 HD1, which seeks to expand the 
Women’s Court pilot program. As a professional that provides services for substance use 
disorder treatment continuum of care services,  I have witnessed firsthand the unique challenges 
that justice-involved women face, particularly those with histories of trauma, substance use 
disorders, and economic instability. 
 
Women in the criminal justice system often arrive there due to a confluence of systemic issues, 
including untreated mental health conditions, lack of stable housing, and experiences of abuse 
and exploitation. Traditional judicial approaches frequently fail to address these underlying 
factors, leading to higher rates of recidivism and continued involvement in the justice system. 
The Women’s Court model, offers a holistic and trauma-informed alternative that provides the 
necessary support for long-term success and reintegration into the community. 
 
Through my work, I have seen that when women receive the necessary support—such as 
substance use disorder treatment, housing assistance, skill-building opportunities, and 
community support—they are significantly more likely to achieve stability and become 
contributing members of their communities. The expansion of this program, along with a study 
on implementation in the Third Circuit, would provide essential resources and alternative 
pathways for women struggling with the cyclical nature of incarceration. 
Furthermore, the proposed appropriations for mental health, substance use disorder treatment, 
and other rehabilitative services are crucial investments in breaking the cycle of incarceration, 
especially for women. Without stable housing and recovery-focused services, many women are 
released back into environments that do not support their rehabilitation, ultimately leading to 
reoffending.  
 
I urge you to pass HB 727 HD1 to continue the critical work of providing solutions that address 
the unique challenges faced by women in the justice system. Expanding the Women’s Court 
model is a necessary step toward reducing recidivism, promoting stability, and fostering healthier 
communities across Hawaii. 

 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
Andi Pawasarat-Losalio 
 

HB-727-HD-1 
Submitted on: 3/18/2025 6:42:59 PM 
Testimony for JDC on 3/19/2025 9:45:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Barbara J. Service 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Please approve pilot programs for Women's Court on the Neighbor Islands as there exists now in 
Honolulu. 
Barbara J. Service MSW 
Child Welfare Supervisor (ret.) 
Passionate Kupuna advocate 
  
 
 	
