JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
 GOVERNOR OF HAWAII 
KE KIAʻĀINA O KA MOKUʻĀINA ʻO HAWAIʻI 
KENNETH S. FINK, M.D., M.G.A, M.P.H 
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH 
KA LUNA HOʻOKELE 
 
STATE OF HAWAII 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 
KA ʻOIHANA OLAKINO 
P. O. Box 3378 
Honolulu, HI  96801-3378 
doh.testimony@doh.hawaii.gov 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony in SUPPORT of HB727 
RELATING TO THE WOMEN’S COURT  
REPRESENTATIVE DAVID A. TARNAS, CHAIR 
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY AND HAWAIIAN AFFAIRS 
 
Hearing Date and Time: January 30, 2025, 2:00 p.m.  
Location: Room 325 & Videoconference.  
 
Fiscal Implications: The Department of Health (“Department”) requests funding for this 
1 
measure be considered as a vehicle to expand services, including staff support, provided it does 
2 
not supplant the requests outlined in the Governor's executive budget request. 
3 
Department Position: The Department supports this measure and offers comments.  
4 
Department Testimony:  The Adult Mental Health Division provides the following testimony on 
5 
behalf of the Department. 
6 
The Department supports this measure which proposes to establish a three-year 
7 
Women’s Court pilot program in the circuit court of the second, third, and fifth circuits. The 
8 
intent of the program is to implement trauma informed and evidence-based practices, employ 
9 
gender-responsive programming, collaborate with stakeholders, and provide services to 
10 
women in the court system with the goal of diverting participants from incarceration, 
11 
supporting their success in the community, and reducing recidivism. 
12 
Mohala Wahine, which was established in the first circuit by Act 243, SLH 2022, has 
13 
been operational since January 2023. In 2024, through our collaborative partnership with the 
14 
Judiciary, the Department conducted 33 mental health screenings and 24 psychological 
15 
assessments of participants for the program. The services offered by the program are 
16 

HB727 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
 
comprehensive and provide an opportunity for participants to achieve meaningful and lasting 
1 
recovery.  
2 
Offered Amendments:  The Department requests a budget of $801,802, which is based on the 
3 
Department’s staffing requirements for the operation of the existing Women’s Court pilot 
4 
project of the First Circuit. Each circuit would require the following: 
5 
1.0 FTE Clinical Psychologist [$145,000] to conduct psychological assessments 
6 
1.0 FTE Social Worker/Human Services Professional IV [$76,788] to conduct screenings 
7 
1.0 FTE Social Services Assistant V [$45,216] to provide peer support 
8 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this measure. 
9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
The Judiciary, State of Hawai‘i 
 
Testimony to the Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 Regular Session 
 
House Committee on Judiciary and Hawaiian Affairs 
Representative David A. Tarnas, Chair 
Representative Mahina Poepoe, Vice Chair 
 
Thursday, January 30, 2025, 2:00 p.m. 
State Capitol, Conference Room 325 & Videoconference 
 
by 
Robert D. S. Kim 
Chief Court Administrator 
Third Circuit Court 
 
 
Bill No. and Title: House Bill No. 727, Relating to Women’s Court. 
 
Purpose: Establishes a temporary three-year woman's court pilot program within the second, 
third, and fifth circuits.  Establishes temporary positions.  Requires a report.  Appropriates funds.  
Sunsets 6/30/2028. 
 
Judiciary's Position:  
 
The Judiciary supports the intent of this measure and proposes amendments and 
modifications based on unique circumstances found on the Big Island, and the structure of the 
state courts in the Third Circuit. 
 
The Judiciary looks forward to opportunities to build upon the successful Women’s Court 
Pilot Program in the First Circuit that this measure represents. To be successful, Women’s Court 
requires sufficient funding and positions, and a good prospect of recruiting qualified staff for 
those positions. To be an effective use of resources, Women’s Court also requires a critical mass 
of female probationers who may be eligible for the program. Accordingly, the design of a 
program tailored to the unique needs of the population and with robust therapeutic rehabilitative 
components for women will be different on the neighbor islands than it has been on O‘ahu. 
 
The circuit courts in the Third Circuit are structured very differently than that of the First 
Circuit.  Circuit court judges are responsible for hearing all cases, such as criminal, civil, agency 

House Bill No. 727, Relating to Women’s Court 
House Committee Judiciary and Hawaiian Affairs 
 
Thursday, January 30, 2025 
 
Page 2  
 
 
appeals, environmental cases and more.  The Big Island Drug Court (BIDC) is stationed in both 
Hilo and Kona.  BIDC also oversees the Veteran’s Treatment Court and the Juvenile Treatment 
Court. 
 
The circuit courts on the Big Island are unable to manage another stand-alone specialty 
treatment court as represented by the template of the successful First Circuit program.  However, 
creating a Women’s Division of the Big Island Drug Court (BIDC) could accomplish the 
purpose. We could design a Women’s Division that incorporates focused rehabilitative mental 
health treatment in light of emotional and often physical traumas, includes a cultural component, 
includes peer support, all in an atmosphere that holds women accountable while providing 
comprehensive court-supervised treatment, opportunities, and resources. 
 
Accordingly, we respectfully request modifications to this measure to focus on launching 
a pilot program in the Third Circuit. Similar to other specialty court programs, circumstances on 
the neighbor islands may warrant different implementation and different resource requirements.   
 
One possible approach would be to pilot a Women’s Division attached to the current 
BIDC program, which currently includes twenty-five (25) women.  By leveraging the existing 
BIDC structure and staff at the outset, it would allow us to supplement the existing services with 
any additional resources provided by this bill.  This option would allow us to tailor to the distinct 
needs of women in the criminal justice system and expand to include women who are currently 
excluded from BIDC program participation. 
 
As an example, we recognize that many women have histories of trauma and abuse, and 
one of the hallmarks of the First Circuit Women’s Court Program is their trauma-informed 
approach.   This trauma requires extensive mental health counseling by trained psychologists, 
psychiatrists, and/or mental health counselors.  As such, our current BIDC staff are not equipped 
or sufficiently resourced to address these complex issues.  The addition of resources for a 
Women’s Division could be used to contract with or hire these trained professionals.  
 
If the Legislature is supportive of the proposed approach, we welcome continued 
discussions this session, and the Third Circuit and BIDC could provide an outline that would be 
workable as soon as possible as to put in place a mental health program that would meet the 
desired goals of a Women’s Treatment Court program. 
  
In the alternative, the Legislature could direct the Third Circuit and the BIDC to conduct 
an interim study to establish a blueprint for the program and set forth the resource requirements, 
to be submitted for the next legislative session. The benefit of the study would be a more detailed 
proposal. 
  

House Bill No. 727, Relating to Women’s Court 
House Committee Judiciary and Hawaiian Affairs 
 
Thursday, January 30, 2025 
 
Page 3  
 
 
The Third Circuit and BIDC stand ready to assist the legislature in whatever policy 
decision is made, as long as we have the requested trained psychologists and psychiatrist on 
contract or hired by the Judiciary, along with additional staff members to be hired by BIDC. 
 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony on this important bill. 

 
 
 
 
OFFICE OF THE PROSECUTING ATTORNEY 
County of Kaua‘i, State of Hawai‘i 
3990 Ka‘ana Street, Suite 210, Līhu‘e, Hawai‘i  96766 
808-241-1888 ~ FAX 808-241-1758 
Victim/Witness Program 808-241-1898 or 800-668-5734 
 
 
An Equal Opportunity Employer 
Rebecca V. Like 
Prosecuting Attorney 
Keola Siu 
First Deputy  
Prosecuting Attorney 
The Honorable David A. Tarnas, Chair 
House Committee on Judiciary & Hawaiian Affairs 
Thirty-third State Legislature 
Regular session of 2025 
State of Hawai‘i 
January 27, 2025 
 
RE: HB 727 Related to Women’s Court 
 
Dear Chair Tarnas: 
 
 
Our Office supports HB 396 which would create a women’s court pilot 
program in the second, third and fifth circuits.  
 
 
I have had the opportunity to observe Women’s Court in the First Circuit 
and have worked with the Honorable Trish Morikawa on the Women’s 
Correction Implementation Commission. I was moved by seeing how the women 
in Women’s Court supported each other. I appreciate that Women’s Court takes 
into account the unique issues that women face. We see those unique issues in 
the cases we prosecute. In addition to histories of abuse and trauma, women 
are often the primary caregivers in their families. It is critical that justice 
involved women have the support and tools they need to become productive 
members of society. Women’s court also helps stop intergenerational trauma.  
 
I believe a similar program could be successful in the Fifth Circuit. 
Should such a program be established on Kauai, our Office offers our full 
support in making it a success. 
 
The Kauai Office of the Prosecuting Attorney submits this testimony in 
SUPPORT of HB 727. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 

  RICHARD T. BISSEN, JR. 
Mayor 
 
ANDREW H. MARTIN 
Prosecuting Attorney 
 
SHELLY C. MIYASHIRO 
First Deputy Prosecuting Attorney 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE PROSECUTING ATTORNEY 
COUNTY OF MAUI 
200 SOUTH HIGH STREET 
WAILUKU, MAUI, HAWAI’I  96793 
           PHONE (808) 270-7777  •  FAX (808) 270-7625 
 
TESTIMONY ON 
H.B. 727  
RELATING TO THE WOMEN’S COURT 
 
January 27, 2025 
 
 
 
 
The Honorable David A. Tarnas 
Chair 
The Honorable Mahina Poepoe 
Vice Chair 
and Members of the Committee on Judiciary and Hawaiian Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chair Tarnas, Vice Chair Poepoe, and Members of the Committee: 
 
The Department of the Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui respectfully submits the 
following comments in support of H.B. 727, Relating to the Women’s Court. This bill would 
establish a three-year women’s court pilot program in the second, third and fifth circuits. 
 
 
The Department of the Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui supports this bill because it 
would provide a needed alternative to incarceration for women within the second circuit, 
particularly women with a high risk of recidivism and in need of services in addition to the 
substance abuse treatment already provided by the Maui Drug Court. We also support the 
program’s use of trauma-informed and evidence-based practices. 
 
 
For these reasons, the Department of the Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui supports 
H.B. 727.  Please feel free to contact our office at (808) 270-7777 if you have any questions or 
inquiries. 
 
 
Thank you very much for the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill. 
 

COMMUNITY ALLIANCE ON PRISONS 
P.O. Box 37158, Honolulu, HI 96837-0158 
Phone/E-Mail:  (808) 927-1214 / kat.caphi@gmail.com 
 
Today’s Inmate; Tomorrow’s Neighbor 
 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY AND HAWAIIAN AFFAIRS 
Representative David Tarnas, Chair 
Representative Mahina Poepoe, Vice Chair 
Thursday, January 30, 2025 
Room 325 & VIDEOCONFERENCE 
2:00 PM 
 
STRONG SUPPORT FOR HB 727 – 3-YEAR PILOT WOMEN’S COURT 
PROGRAM WITHIN THE 2ND, 3RD, & 5TH DISCTRICTS  
 
Aloha Chair Tarnas, Vice Chair Poepoe and Members of the Committee! 
 
My name is Kat Brady and I am the Coordinator of Community Alliance on 
Prisons, a community initiative promoting smart justice policies in Hawai`i for 
more than two decades. This testimony is respectfully offered on behalf of the 
3,717 Hawai`i individuals living behind bars1 and under the “care and custody” 
of the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation on January 20, 2025.  We are 
always mindful that 928 - 29% - of Hawai`i’s imprisoned male population are 
serving their sentences abroad -- thousands of miles away from their loved ones, 
their homes and, for the disproportionate number of incarcerated Kanaka Maoli, 
far, far from their ancestral lands. 
 
Community Alliance on Prisons appreciates this opportunity to share our 
strong support for HB 727 that establishes a temporary 3-year woman's court 
pilot program within the second, third, and fifth circuits, establishes temporary 
positions, and requires a report. Appropriates funds. Sunsets 6/30/2028.  
 
 
1 DCR Weekly Population Report, January 20, 2025 
https://dcr.hawaii.gov/wp-content/uploads/2025/01/Pop-Reports-Weekly-2025-01-20.pdf 
 

People’s pathways to incarceration differ. Women are generally the main 
caregivers to their families and especially their children. This important program 
uses trauma-informed and evidence-based practices through gender-responsive 
programming, collaboration with stakeholders, and providing services to women 
in the court system with the goal of diverting participants from incarceration, 
supporting their success in the community, and reducing recidivism.  
 
This program is vital and we are happy to see this bill expand the 
Women’s Court Program to women on our neighbor islands in the second, third, 
and fifth circuits. Supporting women and families is a crucial step in building a 
safe, strong, healthy, and just Hawai`i. 
 
Mahalo to the Judiciary for their support of this program and to the JHA 
committee for hearing this bill. We look forward to it crossing the finish line, 
especially after the Chief Justice’s glowing report of the work accomplished by 
the Women’s Court. 
 
Mahalo nui for the chance to cheer on the Women’s Court Project! 
 
  
 
   
 
 

 
 
HB727 Women’s Court 
COMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY & HAWAIIAN AFFAIRS 
Rep. David A. Tarnas, Chair 
Rep. Mahina Poepoe, Vice Chair 
Thursday, Jan 30, 2025: 2:00: Room 325 Videoconference 
 
 
 
Hawaii Substance Abuse Coalition Supports HB727: 
 
ALOHA CHAIR, VICE CHAIR, AND DISTINGUISHED COMMITTEE MEMBERS. My 
name is Alan Johnson. I am the current chair of the Hawaii Substance Abuse Coalition 
(HSAC), a statewide organization for substance use disorder and co-occurring mental 
health disorder treatment and prevention agencies and recovery-oriented services. 
 
 
HSAC supports a gender responsive approach to women who are justice-involved 
because recovery involves a multitude of issues such as trauma, substance use 
disorder, mental illness, unhealthy relationships, domestic violence, sexual assault, 
and family law disputes. Courts can ensure a collaboration with multiple providers to 
implement evidenced-based behavioral health practices to support their full recovery 
and not return to incarceration.   
Formal substance abuse with mental illness treatment, 
such as residential and intensive outpatient, is still the 
most effective approach to achieve functionality and 
lasting recovery for justice-involved women.  
 
Substance use disorder coupled with mental health treatment is essential for 
offenders because it addresses the underlying issues that often contribute to criminal 
behavior and helps break the cycle of addiction and recidivism. Gender-responsive 
women’s courts are effective because they address the unique needs and challenges 
women face: 
 
1. Trauma-Informed Approach. Women’s courts often adopt trauma-
informed practices, ensuring that the court process is sensitive to the 
emotional, psychological, and physical impact of trauma on survivors. This 
fosters an environment where women feel safe, heard, and respected. 
  

2. High Rates of Substance Abuse Among Offenders: Many offenders 
struggle with substance use disorders. Studies show that a significant 
proportion of crimes, including theft, assault, and drug-related offenses, are 
committed under the influence of drugs or alcohol. 
 
3. Addresses Root Causes of Criminal Behavior: Substance abuse often 
coexists with mental health issues, trauma, or socioeconomic challenges. 
Treatment programs can provide a comprehensive approach to addressing 
these interconnected factors. Treating substance abuse can lower the 
likelihood of reoffending. Offenders who receive effective treatment are more 
likely to develop coping skills and lead crime-free lives after release. 
 
4. Specialized Training for Judges and Staff: Judges, attorneys, and court 
staff in women’s courts typically receive specialized training in gender 
dynamics, domestic violence, and trauma. This equips them to make 
informed, fair decisions and avoid perpetuating biases or re-traumatizing 
survivors. 
 
5. Integrated Social Services: Women’s courts often partner with social 
services, offering survivors access to counseling, housing assistance, legal aid, 
childcare, and job training. This holistic approach addresses the underlying 
issues that women face, helping them rebuild their lives. 
 
6. Empowering Women: By creating a supportive and understanding 
environment, women’s courts help survivors regain confidence, independence, 
and control over their lives, encouraging long-term recovery and stability 
while simultaneously holding perpetrators accountable while ensuring victim 
safety. 
 
This focused approach ensures that justice-involved women are given an opportunity 
to rebuild their lives, contributing positively to society rather than being trapped in 
cycles of crime and incarceration. 
 
We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony and are available for questions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
LEAGUE OF WOMEN VOTERS OF HAWAII 
P.O. Box 235026 ♦ Honolulu, HI 96823 
Voicemail 808.377.6727 ♦ my.lwv.org/hawaii ♦ voters@lwvhi.org 
 
 
 
Committee on Judiciary and Hawaiian Affairs 
Chair David Tarnas, Vice Chair Mahina Poepoe 
 
January 30, 2025 at 2:00 PM  325 via Videoconference 
HB 727 A Bill Relating to Women’s Court 
 
TESTIMONY 
Stephen Munkelt, Legislative Committee, League of Women Voters of Hawaii 
 
 
Chair Tarnas, Vice Chair Poepoe, and Committee Members: 
 
The League of Women Voters of Hawaii supports BILL NUMBER HB 727 
 
The League of Women Voters believes that evidence-based programs can reduce 
recidivism and provide a path to stable, successful reintegration in the community for 
women who have suffered a criminal conviction. Such programs are also fiscally 
responsible, as supportive services are far less costly than incarceration when a person 
reoffends.  
 
SB 526 expands the pilot program begun in the first circuit in 2022 to three additional 
districts. When women get support dealing with addiction, abuse, and poverty through 
evidence-based programs, education, and training it benefits their children and families, 
neighbors, and the Hawai’i community at large. With this bill the lessons learned in the 
first district can be applied to bring successful outcomes to a  larger number of women, 
for the good of all.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony.  

HB-727 
Submitted on: 1/30/2025 12:49:43 AM 
Testimony for JHA on 1/30/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Carrie Ann Shirota 
ACLU of Hawai'i  
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha Chair Tarnas, Vice Chair Poepoe and Committee Members: 
ACLU of Hawai'i suppports H.B. 727 Relating to Women's Court that establishes a temporary 
three-year woman's court pilot program within the second, third and fifth circuits.   
This pilot program will contribute to the mandate from the Governor, Legislature and community 
to divert people from our overcrowded jails, by providing the resources, health care, substance 
use treatment and other holistic support necessary for healing  and transformation.  
ACLU of Hawai'i recommends that criteria for admission into the Women's Court Program is 
expanded in order to divert more women from our carceral system. Please pass H.B. 727.  
Mahalo,  
Carrie Ann Shirota 
ACLU of Hawai'i Policy Director  
 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

HB-727 
Submitted on: 1/27/2025 12:00:25 PM 
Testimony for JHA on 1/30/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Carla Allison 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
My name is Carla Allison, a 28 year resident of Honolulu, and I strongly support HB727. 
 

HB-727 
Submitted on: 1/28/2025 11:58:33 AM 
Testimony for JHA on 1/30/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Carolyn Eaton 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha, Chair Tarnas, Vice Chair Poepoe, and members of the Committee, 
My name is Carolyn Eaton.  I am a resident of Makiki and I strongly support this bill to expand 
to Neighbor Island populations, the benefits of Women's Court.  The 3-year pilot program 
establishes and funds temporary positions, as the 3-year pilot passed by Legislature for Oahu 
(Circuit 1) in 2022 has proven its advantages. 
Mahalo for helping our state serve its women in this special way.   
 

 
 
                                                                                   
                                                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
January 29, 2025 
 
 
 
H.B. No. 727: RELATING TO THE WOMEN’S COURT 
 
Chair Tarnas, Vice-Chair Poepoe, and Members of the Committee on Judiciary 
& Hawaiian Affairs: 
 
 
 
The Office of the Public Defender strongly supports HB 727.  This bill establishes  
a three-year women’s court pilot program in the second, third, and fifth circuits.  The 
Office of the Public Defender regularly represents women in the criminal legal 
system and knows first-hand the unique needs and issues facing these clients.  Often 
their involvement in the criminal legal system is directly related to trauma, abuse, or 
unhealthy relationships, and they would greatly benefit from gender-responsive 
programming.   
 
The implementation of the women’s court program in the first circuit, known as 
Mohala Wahine, has been thus far successful, with the Office of the Public Defender 
representing most of the participants in the program.   The collaboration with the 
court, the prosecutor’s office, probation department, and service providers has 
allowed the women to receive focused services with the support and resources 
necessary to obtain positive outcomes.  
 
Expansion to the other circuits would allow the program to assist more women in 
need and divert them away from incarceration.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this measure. 
 
 
 
JON N. IKENAGA 
                     PUBLIC DEFENDER 
 
DEFENDER COUNCIL 
1130 NORTH NIMITZ HIGHWAY 
SUITE A-254 
HONOLULU, HAWAI‘I  96817 
 
HONOLULU OFFICE 
1130 NORTH NIMITZ HIGHWAY 
SUITE A-254 
HONOLULU, HAWAI‘I  96817 
 
APPELLATE DIVISION 
TEL. NO. (808) 586-2080 
 
 DISTRICT COURT DIVISION 
TEL. NO. (808) 586-2100 
 
FAMILY COURT DIVISION 
TEL. NO. (808) 586-2300 
 
FELONY DIVISION 
TEL. NO. (808) 586-2200 
 
FACSIMILE 
 (808) 586-2222 
HAYLEY Y. C. CHENG 
                ASSISTANT PUBLIC DEFENDER  
 
HILO OFFICE 
275 PONAHAWAI STREET 
SUITE 201 
HILO, HAWAI‘I   96720 
TEL. NO.  (808) 974-4571 
FAX NO.  (808) 974-4574 
 
KONA OFFICE 
75-1000 HENRY STREET  
SUITE #209 
KAILUA-KONA HI   96740 
TEL. NO.  (808) 327-4650 
FAX NO.  (808) 327-4651 
 
KAUA`I OFFICE 
3060 EIWA STREET 
 SUITE 206 
LIHUE, HAWAI‘I  96766 
TEL. NO.  (808) 241-7128 
FAX NO.  (808) 274-3422 
 
MAUI OFFICE 
81 N. MARKET STREET 
WAILUKU, HAWAI‘I  96793 
TEL. NO.  (808) 984-5018 
FAX NO.  (808) 984-5022 
STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
OFFICE OF THE PUBLIC DEFENDER 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 
