 
 
 
JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
LT. GOVERNOR 
 
MARK B. GLICK 
 CHIEF ENERGY OFFICER 
 
 
HAWAII STATE ENERGY OFFICE 
 
STATE OF HAWAII 
  
235 South Beretania Street, 5th Floor, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813 
Mailing Address:  P.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96804 
Telephone: 
(808) 451-6648 
Web: 
energy.hawaii.gov 
 
 
 
 
Testimony of 
MARK B. GLICK, Chief Energy Officer 
 
before the 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS 
 
Wednesday, February 26, 2025 
10:02 AM 
State Capitol, Conference Room 211 and Videoconference 
 
In Support of 
SB 933, SD1 
 
RELATING TO THE STATE BUDGET. 
 
Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki, and Members of the Committee, the 
Hawai‘i State Energy Office (HSEO) supports SB 933, SD1, which appropriates moneys 
for grants for fiscal year 2025-2026. 
HSEO employs thirteen federal employees and twenty-one active programs 
supported by federal funds that we have energetically been working with the Attorney 
General to safeguard. In that regard we expect to prevail on ensuring all awards granted 
through Congressionally approved funding that came to HSEO by formula or under a 
competitive process remain in place. 
In the interim period, however, the suggested vehicle to provide grants to 
departments affected by the freezing of federal funds is sound policy and presents a 
solid backup for continuing the work currently underway without interruption. We defer 
to the appropriate departments on the fiscal impacts of this measure. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments on this matter. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
The Judiciary, State of Hawai‘i 
 
Testimony to the Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 Regular Session 
 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
Senator Donovan M. Dela Cruz, Chair 
Senator Sharon Y. Moriwaki, Vice Chair 
 
Wednesday February 26, 2025, 10:02 a.m. 
State Capitol, Conference Room 211 and Videoconference 
 
by 
 
Brandon M. Kimura 
Policy and Planning Department Director 
 
 
 
Bill No. and Title: Senate Bill No. 933, SD1, Relating to the State Budget. 
 
Purpose: Appropriates moneys for grants for fiscal year 2025-2026. 
 
Judiciary's Position:  
 
 
The Judiciary respectfully requests consideration for inclusion in Senate Bill No. 933, 
SD1, as several programs funded through federal grants to the Judiciary align with the bill's 
intent to support critical services in our community. 
 
The Judiciary administers various federal grant programs that provide services to court-
involved adults, youth, and families through subawards. Services include, but are not limited to, 
support for substance use assessment and treatment, services for families impacted by domestic 
violence, and programs that strengthen responses to families involved with Child Welfare 
Services. These programs directly contribute to public health, safety, and general welfare - the 
areas of concern identified in Section 3 of this measure.  It is vital to ensure the continuous 
provision of these services. 
 
The total federal grant funding administered by the Judiciary for these critical services as 
described in Senate Bill No. 933, SD1, amounts to approximately $615,000.  
 

Senate Bill No. 933, SD1, Relating to the State Budget 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
 
Wednesday, February 26, 2025, 10:03 a.m.  
 
Page 2  
 
 
The Judiciary respectfully requests that any appropriation for this measure not supplant 
Judiciary priorities nor biennium budget requests. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this measure. 
 

 
 
Testimony to the Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
Wednesday, February 26, 2025; 10:02 a.m. 
State Capitol, Conference Room 211 
Via Videoconference 
 
 
RE:  
SENATE BILL NO. 0933, SENATE DRAFT 1, RELATING TO THE STATE BUDGET. 
 
 
Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki, and Members of the Committee: 
 
 
The Hawaii Primary Care Association (HPCA) is a 501(c)(3) organization established to advocate 
for, expand access to, and sustain high quality care through the statewide network of Community Health 
Centers throughout the State of Hawaii.  The HPCA SUPPORTS Senate Bill No. 0933, Senate Draft 1, 
RELATING TO THE STATE BUDGET. 
 
 
By way of background, the HPCA represents Hawaii's Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs).  
FQHCs provide desperately needed medical services at the frontlines to over 150,000 patients each year 
who live in rural and underserved communities.  Long considered champions for creating a more 
sustainable, integrated, and wellness-oriented system of health, FQHCs provide a more efficient, more 
effective and more comprehensive system of healthcare. 
 
 
This measure, as received by your Committee, would provide one-time, nonrecurring grants to 
organizations that provide critical services in accordance with Chapter 42F, Hawaii Revised Statutes. 
 
 
The COVID-19 pandemic placed an unprecedented strain on Hawaii's social safety net.  It 
effectively shut down the economy and forced many businesses to close.  For those fortunate to remain 
open, many needed to lay off workers and fundamentally change the way they conducted business.   
 
 
Social service nonprofit organizations saw enormous increases in demand for services caused by 
increased unemployment.  They also needed to provide these services at a time when their revenues 
declined significantly.  Private donations, the life blood for many of Hawaii's nonprofits, dried up.  The 
State of Hawaii did not authorize any grant in aid during the Regular Sessions of 2020 and 2021.  And 
while the federal government provided various loans and stimulus payments to ease immediate program 
demands, most nonprofits have had to set aside capital and development needs to focus solely on 
getting the most essential services out to the greatest number of clients in the shortest period of time.   
 
 

 
 
 
Testimony on Senate Bill No. 0933, Senate Draft 1 
Wednesday, February 26, 2025; 10:02 a.m. 
Page 2 
 
 
 
Because of the changes made to the State Budget and as the economy slowly recovered, Hawaii's 
ability to generate revenue began to improve.  Visitors returned to the State and construction picked up 
even more.  During the 2022 Regular Session, general fund revenues returned to pre-pandemic levels 
allowing lawmakers to appropriate $50 million in grant in aid to address the needs of nonprofits.  While 
this is more than what was provided in 2019, it will take much more to replenish and rejuvenate the 
social safety net. 
 
 
Many of our nonprofits continue to operate at deficits or have not replaced the staff that were 
laid off.  The markets for professionals have become much tighter requiring employers to offer more to 
just retain existing staff let alone recruit replacements.  The "new normal" demands that much more will 
be needed to just keep the status quo. 
 
 
In light of this, given the huge surpluses the State is currently experiencing and anticipating for 
the out years, now is the time for the State to commit to rehabilitating Hawaii's social safety net.  
Furthermore, as the Council on Revenues and economists predict a recession in the near future, it is 
even more imperative that our nonprofits are strengthened to meet the demands that the next calamity 
will pose. 
 
 
To do this, there needs to be sufficient political commitment.  Senate Bill No. 0933 is a start, but 
the Legislature and the Administration must be willing and able to sustain these efforts over time.  As an 
example, perhaps the commitment of $50 million in general funds for grant in aid annually for a five-
year period would infuse $250 million to nonprofits.  Also, approval of even more funding to assist 
nonprofits expand their footprints so that they will be able to do even more in the future is greatly 
warranted.   
 
 
To that end, the HPCA urges your favorable consideration of this measure. 
 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.  Should you have any questions, please do not hesitate 
to contact Public Affairs and Policy Director Erik K. Abe at 536-8442, or eabe@hawaiipca.net. 

 
Makiki: 1020 South Beretania St., Honolulu, Hawai‘i  96814     Downtown: 1188 Bishop St., Ste 3209, Honolulu, HI 96813 
www.tlchawaii.org    (808) 777-7071    fax (808) 930-0969 
 
Statement Before The 
Wednesday, February 26, 2025 
10:02 AM 
Conference Room 211 & Videoconference 
 
in consideration of 
SB933, SD1 
 
RELATING TO THE STATE BUDGET. 
 
Chair DELA CRUZ, Vice Chair MORIWAKI, and Members of the Senate Ways and Means Committee 
 
The Legal Clinic (TLC) supports SB933, SD1, which provides one-time nonrecurring grants to 
organizations that provide critical services, in accordance with chapter 42F, Hawaii Revised Statutes. 
 
TLC is a Hawai‘i nonprofit, nonpartisan organization. TLC is a direct legal services provider, representing 
those in Hawai‘i who meet income eligibility guidelines without regard to immigration status, national 
origin, ethnic background, race, religion, ideology, gender identity, sexual orientation, age, or disability. 
TLC works alongside immigrants so they can attain authorization to work and live with dignity, reunite 
with their families after years of separation and escape horrific violence to find refuge in the United 
States. TLC recognizes that every person needs and deserves to feel a sense of trust, welcome, and 
belonging. 
 
TLC supports increased funding for Hawaii’s nonprofit community, given the reduced assistance from 
the current federal administration. Hawaii’s nonprofit sector provides critical social safety net services to 
the community, including the immigrant and migrant population served by TLC. Specifically, TLC 
provides Know Your Rights community trainings, which are much requested in these current times.  
 
SB933, SD1 is necessary to help nonprofits in these uncertain fiscal times and does not include Judiciary 
based non-profits. Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of SB933, SD1, and TLC 
respectfully urges the Committee members to pass SB933, SD1 out of your Committee.  If you have 
questions of me, please contact me at sma@tlchawaii.org.  
 
Very respectfully yours, 
 
Sandy Ma 
 
Sandy Ma 
Community & Policy Advocate 
The Legal Clinic 

 
HAWAI`I YOUTH SERVICES NETWORK 
677 Ala Moana Blvd., Suite 904 
Honolulu, Hawai`i 96813 
Phone: (808) 489-9549  
Web site:  http://www.hysn.org     E-mail: info@hysn.org 
 
Vonnell Ramos, President 
Cyd Hoffeld, Vice President 
Sione Ford Naeata, Treasurer 
Greg Tjapkes, Secretary 
 
Judith F. Clark, Executive  
Director   
Network Membership 
 
Access to Independence 
Big Brothers Big Sisters Hawai`i 
Bobby Benson Center 
Child and Family Service 
Coalition for a Drug-Free Hawai`i  
Domestic Violence Action Center 
EPIC `Ohana, Inc. 
Friends of the Children’s Justice 
     Center of Maui 
Get Ready Hawai`i 
Hale Kipa, Inc. 
Hale `Opio Kaua`i, Inc. 
Hawai`i Children’s Action 
     Network 
Hawai`i Health & Harm  
     Reduction Center 
Hawaii Island Community’ 
      Health Center 
Ho`ola Na Pua 
Ho`okele Coalition of Kaua`i 
Ka Hale Pomaika`i 
Kokua Kalihi Valley 
Kaua`i Planning and Action 
     Alliance 
Lines for Life Youth Line 
Maui Youth and Family Services 
Na Pu`uwai Molokai Native 
     Hawaiian Health Care  
     Systems 
P.A.R.E.N.T.S., Inc. 
Parents and Children Together 
PHOCUSED  
Piha Wellness and Healing 
Planned Parenthood of the 
     Great Northwest, Hawaii 
    Alaska, Kentucky, Indiana 
Residential Youth Services 
     & Empowerment (RYSE) 
Salvation Army Family  
     Intervention Services 
Sex Abuse Treatment Center 
Susannah Wesley Community 
     Center 
The Catalyst Group 
 
 
February 22, 2025 
 
 
 
To: 
Senator Donovan Dela Cruz, Chari, 
And members of the Committee on Ways and Means 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF SB 933 SD1 RELATING TO 
THE STATE BUDGET 
 
Hawaii Youth Services Network (HYSN), a statewide coalition of 
youth-serving organizations, supports SB 933 SD1 Relating to the 
State Budget. 
 
As I listened to the testifiers in the grant-in-aid hearing, I learned 
about the critically important and effective work that Hawaii’s non-
profits are doing in communities throughout our state.  The funds that 
HYSN and other organizations are requesting strengthen families, 
preserve and protect the ʻaina, promote economic growth, and help 
our keiki to grow up safe and healthy. 
 
As the federal administration works on cutting funding for essential 
services, it is critical for our state government to support  these 
evidence-informed, culturally relevant, and trauma-informed 
programs. 
 
Thank you for this opportunity to testify.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Judith F. Clark, MPH 
Executive Director 

 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
February 26, 2025 at 10:02 AM 
Room 211 
 
Testimony in SUPPORT for SB933 SD1 
 
 
Aloha Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki, and members of the Committee: 
 
On behalf of the Hawai‘i Alliance of Nonprofit Organizations, we offer testimony and a sign-on 
letter submitted by 76 community-based organizations in strong support of SB933 SD1, which 
proposes the “Grant Funding Act of 2025” to increase funding for nonprofit organizations across the 
state.  
 
The Hawai‘i Alliance of Nonprofit Organizations (HANO) is a statewide, sector-wide professional 
association of nonprofits that works to strengthen and unite the nonprofit sector as a collective force 
to improve the quality of life in Hawai‘i. Since 2006, HANO has been a leading voice for the nonprofit 
sector, leveraging resources, educating and advocating for policies and practices that promote the 
professionalism, sustainability, and effectiveness of nonprofits and the communities they serve.  
Hawaii’s nonprofit sector plays an indispensable role in delivering essential health and human 
services to residents across the islands. Nonprofit organizations support programs in federally 
qualified health centers, early childhood education, domestic violence support, subsidized housing, 
and homelessness prevention—lifelines for thousands of individuals and families. Although the order 
to freeze funding is currently revoked, the Trump administration has been clear that it intends to 
implement the President’s broad and far-reaching executive orders, including restructuring federal 
government grants and contracts programming targeting diversity, equity, and inclusion, immigration, 
environmental protection, and other subsectors.1 As a result, a variety of vital community services 
and programs in Hawai‘i are at risk of losing millions of dollars in federal funding in 2025. Without a 
state-level investment to bridge this financial gap, Hawai‘i’s safety net for those in need will be 
severely compromised. 
In addition, the nonprofit sector makes up nearly 12% of the state’s workforce, providing local 
employment to thousands of individuals across various fields.2 According to USAspending.gov 
estimates, as many as 250 nonprofits in Hawai‘i were recipients of federal grants and contracts in 
FY23, totaling as much as $300M-$400M.The potential loss of millions of dollars in federal funding 
not only threatens essential services, but also puts these jobs at risk. Without adequate support, the 
2  Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, The Economics Daily, Nonprofits accounted for 12.8 million jobs, 9.9 
percent of private-sector employment, in 2022 at 
https://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2024/nonprofits-accounted-for-12-8-million-jobs-9-9-percent-of-private-sector-employment-in-2022.htm 
(visited February 10, 2025). 
1 National Council of Nonprofits, Executive Orders Affecting Charitable Nonprofits. Updated February 10, 2025. 
https://www.councilofnonprofits.org/files/media/documents/2025/chart-executive-orders.pdf 
hano-hawaii.org ● (808) 529-0466  
 

nonprofit sector could see widespread layoffs, exacerbating economic instability and further straining 
Hawai‘i’s communities. 
SB933 SD1 is a necessary and urgent response to this federal funding crisis. By increasing grant 
funding for nonprofits, the State of Hawai‘i can help to ensure these organizations remain 
operational, safeguarding the health, well-being, and stability of our communities. A state investment 
in nonprofits is an investment in Hawai‘i’s future, as nonprofits not only provide direct critical 
services, but also employ thousands of local residents to fulfill their charitable missions. 
Mahalo for hearing this important bill. 
 
 
 

To: Hawai‘i State Legislators 
Date: February 25, 2025 
Re: Hawai‘i Nonprofits Sign-on in Support of SB933: “Grant Funding Act of 2025” 
Aloha Hawai‘i Senators and Representatives, 
We, the 76 undersigned Hawai‘i nonprofit organizations, strongly urge your support for SB933, the 
“Grant Funding Act of 2025,” which seeks to provide emergency funding to nonprofit organizations 
across the state. This critical investment comes at a time when the federal government is potentially 
freezing grants and contracts to Hawai‘i’s nonprofits, putting essential community services and local 
jobs at risk. Without immediate state intervention, Hawai‘i’s most vulnerable residents will experience 
service reductions and resource shortages at a time when they need them most. 
Supporting SB933 will: 
●​
Ensure uninterrupted access to vital health and human services, including federally qualified 
health centers, early childhood education, domestic violence support, subsidized housing, 
and homelessness prevention. 
●​
Stabilize the nonprofit sector amid federal funding cuts in traditionally marginalized and 
underserved communities. 
●​
Protect Hawai‘i’s nonprofit workforce, which comprises nearly 12% of the state’s total 
employment, safeguarding thousands of jobs.3 
●​
Strengthen Hawai‘i’s local economy by keeping essential services operational and 
preventing widespread layoffs in the nonprofit sector. 
With the potential loss of millions in federal funding in 2025, the passage and full funding of SB933 is 
a timely and necessary measure to bridge the financial gap and prevent disruptions in crucial 
community programs. By increasing state grant funding for nonprofits, Hawai‘i can proactively 
sustain services that support public health, economic stability, and environmental and social 
well-being. An investment in nonprofits is an investment in Hawai‘i’s future, ensuring that the 
organizations serving our communities can continue their vital missions.  
Mahalo for your commitment to support Hawai‘i’s nonprofit organizations during this critical time. 
 
Mahalo, 
`A`ALI`I Mentoring 
Kalamapi'i PLAY School 
Akaka Foundation for Tropical Forests 
Kanehunamoku Voyaging Academy 
Big Brothers Big Sisters Hawaii 
Kauai Search and Rescue 
CKO Consulting LLC 
Keiki Kupuna 
Creative Research Solutions 
Ko`olau Foundation 
3  Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, The Economics Daily, Nonprofits accounted for 12.8 million jobs, 9.9 
percent of private-sector employment, in 2022 at 
https://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2024/nonprofits-accounted-for-12-8-million-jobs-9-9-percent-of-private-sector-employment-in-2022.htm 
(visited February 10, 2025). 
 

Creative Research Solutions 
La Sorellanza 
Dawn Morais LLC 
Learning Endeavors 
East Hawaii Cultural Center 
Limahuli Garden & Preserve, NTBGG 
Family Programs Hawaii 
Maui Cancer Resources 
Friends of the Children's Justice Center of 
Oʻahu 
Maui Humane Society 
Goodwill Hawaii 
Maui Mediation Services 
Gregory House Programs 
Maui Pops Orchestra Inc 
Grow Good Hawaii 
Maunalua Fishpond Heritage Center 
Grow Some Good 
Moloka`i Land Trust 
Haku Baldwin Center 
National Tropical Botanical Garden 
HANO 
Papahānaumokuākea Marine Debris Project 
Hawai‘i Public Health Institute 
Partners in Development Foundation 
Hawaiʻi Children's Action Network 
Project Dāna 
Hawaii Alliance for Progressive Action (HAPA) 
Project Vision Hawai’i 
Hawaii Families As Allies 
Puʻuhonua Society 
Hawaii Good Food Alliance 
Puna Rising Ohana 
Hawaii Green Growth 
Responsive Caregivers of Hawaii 
Hawaii Health and Harm Reduction Center 
Sakyadhita Hawai'i 
Hawaii VA Foundation (DBA Our Kupuna) 
Samaritan Counseling Center Hawai'i 
Hawaii Youth Services Network 
Steadfast Housing Development Corporation 
Hawaiian Humane Society 
The Arc of Kona 
Hawaiian Mission Houses Historic Site and 
Archives 
The Caregiver Foundation 
Hawaiian Volcano Education and Resilience 
Institute 
The Kohala Center 
Ho`oulu Lāhui 
The Merwin Conservancy 
Hoʻohanu 
The Spirit Horse Ranch Inc 
Hoʻomāhua Foundation 
Trees for Honolulu’s Future 
Honolulu Zoological Society 
Volcano Arts Center 
HUGS for Hawaii's Seriously Ill Children and 
Their Families 
Wahine Freelance Alliance 
Kua'āina Ulu Auamo  
WAI: Wastewater Alternatives & Innovations 
ʻŌiwi TV 
Wisdom Circles Oceania 
IBOUNCE UP, INC. 
Women4Nonviolence 
IT Reuse Hawai'i 
YWCA Kauai 
Jewish Community Services of Hawaii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
    C L A R E N C E  T .  C .  C H I N G  C A M P U S   1 8 2 2  K e ‘ e a u m o k u  S t r e e t ,  H o n o l u l u ,  H I  9 6 8 2 2  
    P h o n e  ( 8 0 8 ) 5 2 7 - 4 8 1 3    
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF SB 933, SD1:  RELATING TO THE STATE BUDGET 
 
TO:  
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
FROM: 
Tina Andrade, President and CEO, Catholic Charities Hawai‘i 
Hearing: 
Wednesday, February 26, 2025 @ 10:02am CR 211 & videoconference 
 
Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki, and Members of the Committee: 
Catholic Charities Hawai‘i (CCH) appreciates the opportunity to submit testimony in Strong 
Support of SB 933, SD1, the “Grant Funding Act of 2025.” This critical legislation will provide 
emergency state grants to stabilize Hawai‘i’s nonprofit sector in the face of potential federal 
funding cuts, ensuring continued access to essential services for our most vulnerable residents. 
For over 77 years, CCH has been committed to serving Hawai‘i’s communities, providing social 
services to children, families, elders, individuals experiencing homelessness, veterans, and 
immigrants. Through our experience providing services in Hawai’i, we witness firsthand the vital 
role nonprofits play in delivering health and human services, affordable housing assistance, and 
crisis intervention programs. 
Hawai‘i’s Community-Based Organizations (CBOs) are at a financial crossroads. With looming 
federal funding freezes, CBOs that serve traditionally marginalized and underserved 
communities are at risk of severe disruption. This bill will help to ensure uninterrupted access to 
critical health and human services and stabilize CBOs in the face of federal funding 
uncertainties.  SB 933, SB1 will safeguard essential programs that provide vital support to 
underserved communities. Additionally, this measure will protect CBOs positions, which make 
up nearly 12% of Hawai‘i’s workforce, helping to prevent widespread layoffs and the economic 
instability that would follow. Strengthening Hawai‘i’s local economy by keeping CBOs 
operational will also reduce the strain on public assistance programs while ensuring continued 
support for community well-being. 
With the potential loss of millions in federal funding in 2025, the passage and full funding of SB 
933, SB1 is a necessary investment to prevent service disruptions and ensure that CBOs can 
continue meeting critical community needs. An investment in CBOs is an investment in 
Hawai‘i’s future, reinforcing public health, economic stability, and social resilience. 
Catholic Charities Hawai’i urges the Legislature to pass SB 933, SD1, and prioritize the financial 
stability of Hawai‘i’s nonprofit sector. If you have any questions, please contact our Shellie Niles 
at (808) 527-4813. Thank you for your time and consideration.   
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF SB 933 SD1 
RELATING TO THE STATE BUDGET 
  
TO:        
Chair Dela Cruz, Vice-Chair Moriwaki, & Members,  
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
FROM:  
Trisha Kajimura, Vice-President of Strategy & External Affairs   
DATE:   
February 26, 2025 at 10:02 AM 
 
Parents And Children Together (PACT)  supports SB 933 HD1, which provides one-time 
nonrecurring grants to organizations that provide critical services, in accordance with chapter 
42F. 
 
Founded by residents of Kuhio Park Terrace in 1968, PACT is a statewide community-based 
organization providing a wide array of innovative and educational social services to families in 
need.  Assisting more than 15,000 people across the state annually, we help identify, address, 
and successfully resolve challenges through our 20 programs.  Among our services are early 
education programs, domestic violence prevention and intervention programs, child abuse 
prevention and intervention programs, childhood sexual abuse supportive group services, child 
and adolescent behavioral health programs, sex trafficking intervention, poverty prevention 
and community building programs. 
 
PACT relies on federal funding through direct grants and also distributed through state 
contracts to provide the above services to the community. For example, PACT is a provider of 
Head Start and Early Head Start programs on Oahu and Hawaii Island, serving approximately 
800 children. PACT also has federal funds in its child welfare, domestic violence, youth drop-in, 
and family center programs. These programs have been the backbone of communities such as 
Kuhio Park Terrace, Halawa, Kaneohe, Maui County and Hawaiian Beaches in helping families 
achieve and maintain safety, economic stability and school engagement. As you may have 
heard through the  True Cost Coalition, these programs are already under funded. The loss of 
federal funding puts them at serious risk. 
 
Thank you for introducing and hearing this bill. We appreciate the opportunity to testify. Please 
contact me at (808) 847-3285 or tkajimura@pacthawaii.org if you have any questions. 

 
 
TO:  
COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS 
The Honorable Senator Donovan M. Dela Cruz, Chair 
The Honorable Senator Sharon Y. Moriwaki, Vice Chair, and  
Members of the Committee  
  
FROM: Michelle Ka‘uhane, Senior Vice President & Chief Impact Officer  
  
DATE:  February 25, 2025 
  
RE: Testimony in Support for SB 933 SD 1, Relating to the State Budget 
Date: Wednesday, February 26, 2025 at 10:02am 
Place: Hearing Room 211 
 
The Hawaiʻi Community Foundation (HCF) supports Senate Bill 933 SD 1 (SB 933 SD1) relating to 
the State Budget. The bill would appropriate funds for grants in fiscal year 2025-2026 to stabilize 
Hawai‘i’s nonprofit sector. The “Grant Funding Act of 2025” is crucial to maintaining access to 
community services and local jobs threatened by potential federal funding freezes.  
 
Our communities rely on nonprofit services funded by federal grants and contracts. Recently, the 
Urban Institute analyzed the potential scale of impact on the nation’s nonprofit sector. Urban 
Institute used 990 forms to determine the impact of federal funding and found two out of three 
nonprofits receive at least one government grant or contract. Hawai‘i’s nonprofits receive a total 
of $1.1 billion in government grants, and the share of at-risk nonprofits in our island home is 70%. 
Hawai‘i County has the largest share of at-risk nonprofits (73%). 
 
Hawai‘i Community Foundation collaborates with Hawai‘i’s nonprofit sector to ensure that our 
people and places thrive. We believe in our strong, capable nonprofit leadership that has nimbly 
responded to emergencies such as the Covid-19 pandemic, Maui fires, and needs that arise in 
specific communities. The nonprofit workforce comprises 12% of the state’s total employment 
representing thousands of local jobs. It is urgent to provide emergency and bridge funding to 
prevent disruptions in crucial community programs, and empower our nonprofit organizations 
faced with fiscal uncertainty to deliver excellent services in public health, human services, 
housing, job training, financial stability, environmental, and social well-being. These services are 
vital to our communities and enable the government, business, and philanthropic sectors to 
deliver on our missions and our shared vision for a thriving Hawai‘i.  
 
Please advance SB 933 SD1. 
 	

Hawai`i True Cost Coalition 
1099 Alakea Street, Suite 2530, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813 | (808) 447-1840 
 
Date:  February 26, 2025  
Re:  
Support of SB933 SD1, Relating to the State Budget  
 
 
Aloha Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki, and Members of the Committee,  
 
Our coalition of organizations for Hawaiʻi True Cost Coalition are writing in support of SB933 SD1, 
Relating to the State Budget. The bill SB933 SD1 provides one-time, nonrecurring grants to organizations 
that offer critical services, such as health care, social services, child care, subsidized housing, and 
homeless services, in accordance with Chapter 42F of the Hawaii Revised Statutes. This funding is 
intended to support community-based organizations (CBOs) affected by the federal funding freeze. 
 
The Hawai‘i True Cost Coalition is an alliance of over 70 community-based nonprofit organizations 
serving more than 500,000 residents statewide. Since its establishment in 2020, the coalition has 
focused on strengthening collaboration between nonprofits and the state to ensure taxpayer funds are 
allocated equitably and efficiently. By advocating for sustainable funding solutions, the coalition helps 
safeguard critical services for Hawai‘i's most vulnerable populations, including children, kupuna, 
individuals experiencing homelessness, and survivors of domestic violence. These efforts are essential to 
ensuring that nonprofit organizations can continue providing the vital care and support on which so 
many residents rely.  
  
Hawai‘i’s safety net often goes unnoticed—until it begins to fray. This safety net consists of community-
based nonprofit organizations (CBOs) that provide essential services to tens of thousands of residents 
every day. These organizations offer shelter for at-risk youth, meals for kupuna, aid for survivors of 
domestic violence, and countless other supports that touch every corner of the state. Without 
immediate action, many of these programs could disappear entirely, leaving some of Hawai‘i’s most 
vulnerable residents without the critical support they need to thrive.  
 
HB933 SD1 aids crises initiated by the federal funding freeze by supporting community-based 
organizations and their crucial operations. This measure promotes community well-being while 
strengthening Hawai‘i’s social safety net for the future. Investing now secures vital support for years to 
come.  
 
Mahalo for the opportunity to testify on this important measure.  
 
 
 	

SB-933-SD-1 
Submitted on: 2/22/2025 3:51:07 PM 
Testimony for WAM on 2/26/2025 10:02:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Master Shelby "Pikachu" 
Billionaire  
Testifying for Kingdom of 
The Hawaiian Islands 
Oppose 
Remotely Via 
Zoom 
 
 
Comments:  
Dear Members of the Hawaii State Legislature, 
I urge you to reject S.B. No. 933, the “Grant Funding Act of 2025,” which claims to support 
nonprofits amid a federal funding freeze. Below are data-driven reasons this bill perpetuates the 
State of Hawaii’s historical and ongoing financial exploitation of the People of the Kingdom of 
the Hawaiian Islands: 
• 
Historical Theft Sets the Stage: 
o In 1893, the illegal overthrow of the Hawaiian Kingdom led to the seizure of 1.8 
million acres of Crown and Government lands, valued today at over $200 billion 
(adjusted for inflation, per University of Hawaii economic estimates). 
o The State has since managed these lands via the Department of Land and Natural 
Resources (DLNR), generating $160 million in revenue annually (DLNR FY 
2023 report), yet native Hawaiians see less than 20% reinvested into their 
communities (OHA 2022 audit). 
o S.B. 933’s vague appropriations echo this pattern—diverting funds from the 
people under the guise of “public interest.” 
• 
Unaccountable Spending Risks Embezzlement: 
o Section 5 of S.B. 933 appropriates unspecified “sums” for fiscal year 2025-2026, 
with no cap or detailed allocation, mirroring past state budgets where 15% of 
discretionary funds ($450 million in FY 2022, per Department of Budget and 
Finance) went untracked in post-audit reviews. 
o Section 6 lets the governor shuffle funds across projects, a mechanism used in FY 
2021 to redirect $50 million from education to unspecified “emergency” uses 
(Hawaii Budget Transparency Report 2022). This opacity invites laundering of 
public money into private hands. 
• 
Nonprofit “Support” Masks Waste: 
o Hawaii’s nonprofit sector, with 7,800 organizations (Hawaii Community 
Foundation 2023), relies on $1.2 billion in federal funds annually—S.B. 933’s 
one-time grants won’t offset a freeze when 30% of past state grants ($36 million 
in FY 2020, per DBEDT) were lost to administrative overhead or 
mismanagement. 
o Example: The 2019 Maui nonprofit grant scandal saw $2.3 million misallocated 
to politically connected groups (Hawaii News Now investigation)—S.B. 933’s 
lack of oversight (e.g., no audit mandates) risks repeating this. 

• 
Native Hawaiians Bear the Burden: 
o Native Hawaiians, 21% of the population (U.S. Census 2020), own just 5% of 
private land due to State-controlled trusts, while the State’s general fund—fueling 
bills like S.B. 933—grew to $10 billion in FY 2024 (DBF), partly from taxing 
native communities already strained by a 50% poverty rate (OHA 2023). 
o This bill’s funding (likely from general funds, “A” in MOF terms) further drains 
resources from a people owed restitution, not exploitation. 
• 
Call to Action: 
o Reject S.B. No. 933—its loose structure enables the State to continue siphoning 
wealth, as it has since 1893, when $1.5 million in Kingdom assets (1893 dollars, 
~$45 million today) vanished into U.S. and State hands (Hawaiian Historical 
Society). 
o Instead, redirect $500 million—the estimated annual shortfall for native housing 
and health (OHA 2024)—to the People of the Kingdom of the Hawaiian Islands 
as a step toward justice. 
The data is clear: S.B. No. 933 isn’t a solution—it’s a symptom of a system that has embezzled 
from us for over a century. Vote no and prioritize restitution over expansion. Mahalo for your 
attention—I expect your response and commitment to equity. 
Sincerely, 
Master Shelby "Pikachu" Billionaire 
Kingdom of The Hawaiian Islands H.I. 
Ke Aupuni o Ko Hawai'i Pae Aina 
 

SB-933-SD-1 
Submitted on: 2/23/2025 6:07:46 PM 
Testimony for WAM on 2/26/2025 10:02:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Alice Abellanida  
Individual 
Oppose 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I oppose this bill. It has loopholes that allow for money laundering. I urge you to kill this bill.  
 

SB-933-SD-1 
Submitted on: 2/23/2025 6:05:41 PM 
Testimony for WAM on 2/26/2025 10:02:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Erin Azuma 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha, 
I am writing in SUPPORT of SB933 SD1. With changes to federal funding priorities and 
accessibility, Hawaiʻiʻs nonprofit sector is greatly suffering. This threatened community-trusted 
organizations who provide essential community services and impacts the local public servants 
who work these jobs. It is hard to watch my friends, community, and family be affected by lay-
offs, federal funding freezes, and threats to the integrity of the work that they are no longer able 
to carry out. Increasing state grant funding allows nonprofits to diversify their funding sources, 
and be able to continue fulfilling their important missions to better serve our greater community.  
Mahalo nui loa.  
 

SB-933-SD-1 
Submitted on: 2/23/2025 8:53:30 PM 
Testimony for WAM on 2/26/2025 10:02:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Jan K Baldado 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha, 
I SUPPORT SB933. 
Mahalo nui. 
 

SB-933-SD-1 
Submitted on: 2/25/2025 9:25:44 AM 
Testimony for WAM on 2/26/2025 10:02:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Lisa Maruyama 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki and members of the Ways and Means Committee,  
I wholeheartedly support SB 933 SD1 that creates emergency grants for community based 
organizations providing critical services to our communities across the state that are affected by 
the freeze of federal funding.  
Mahalo,  
Lisa Maruyama, LTM Consulting 
 

SB-933-SD-1 
Submitted on: 2/25/2025 1:04:25 PM 
Testimony for WAM on 2/26/2025 10:02:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Greg Misakian 
Individual 
Comments 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Please ensure that SB933 SD1 does not overstep other laws in place requiring oversight and 
sign-off to release funds to the private sector.  This bill should also limit the Governor from 
having total or final say on any allocation of funds. 
Gregory Misakian 
 
 	
