 
 
 
JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
LT. GOVERNOR 
 
MARK B. GLICK 
CHIEF ENERGY OFFICER 
 
 
HAWAII STATE ENERGY OFFICE 
 
STATE OF HAWAII 
  
235 South Beretania Street, 5th Floor, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813 
Mailing Address:  P.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96804 
Telephone: 
(808) 451-6648 
Web: 
energy.hawaii.gov 
 
 
 
 
Testimony of 
MARK B. GLICK, Chief Energy Officer 
 
before the 
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
 
Thursday, March 27, 2025 
2:00 P.M. 
State Capitol, Conference Room 308 and Videoconference 
 
In Support of 
SB 933, SD2 
 
RELATING TO THE STATE BUDGET. 
 
 
Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and Members of the Committee, the 
Hawai‘i State Energy Office (HSEO) supports SB 933, SD2, which appropriates moneys 
for grants for fiscal year 2025-2026. 
HSEO employs thirteen federal employees and twenty-one active programs 
supported by federal funds totaling nearly $140 million awarded since January of 2023 
that we have aggressively worked with the Attorney General’s office to safeguard.  In 
that regard, we expect to prevail in ensuring all grant awards to HSEO either approved 
by Congress by a predetermined formula or under a competitive process remain in 
place.  
In the interim period, however, the suggested vehicle to provide grants to 
departments affected by the freezing of federal funds is sound policy and presents a 
prudent, equitable contingency for continuing the work currently underway to fulfill 
HSEO’s statutory obligations pursuant to HRS 196-71 and HRS 196-72 without 
interruption.  We defer to the appropriate departments on the fiscal impacts of this 
measure. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
The Judiciary, State of Hawai‘i 
 
Testimony to the Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 Regular Session 
 
House Committee on Finance 
Representative Kyle T. Yamashita, Chair 
Representative Jenna Takenouchi, Vice Chair 
 
Thursday, March 27, 2025, 2:00 p.m. 
State Capitol, Conference Room 308 and Videoconference 
 
by 
 
Brandon M. Kimura 
Policy and Planning Department Director 
 
 
 
Bill No. and Title: Senate Bill No. 933, SD2, Relating to the State Budget. 
 
Purpose: Appropriates moneys for grants for fiscal year 2025-2026.  Subjects recipient 
organizations to certain requirements.  Effective 7/1/2050. (SD2) 
 
Judiciary's Position:  
 
 
The Judiciary strongly supports this measure. Several programs funded through federal 
grants to the Judiciary align with the bill's intent to support critical services in our community.  
 
The Judiciary administers various federal grant programs that provide services to court-
involved adults, youth, and families through subawards. Services include, but are not limited to, 
support for substance use assessment and treatment, services for families impacted by domestic 
violence, and programs that strengthen responses to families involved with Child Welfare 
Services. These programs directly contribute to public health, safety, and general welfare - the 
areas of concern identified in Part I, Section 2 of this measure. It is vital to ensure the continuous 
provision of these services. 
 
The total federal grant funding administered by the Judiciary for these critical services as 
described in Senate Bill No. 933, SD2, amounts to approximately $615,000.  
 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

Senate Bill No. 933, SD2, Relating to the State Budget 
House Committee on Finance 
 
Thursday, March 27, 2025, 2:00 p.m.  
 
Page 2  
 
 
The Judiciary respectfully requests that any appropriation for this measure not supplant 
Judiciary priorities nor biennium budget requests. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this measure. 
 

 
HAWAI`I YOUTH SERVICES NETWORK 
677 Ala Moana Blvd., Suite 904 
Honolulu, Hawai`i 96813 
Phone: (808) 489-9549  
Web site:  http://www.hysn.org     E-mail: info@hysn.org 
 
Vonnell Ramos, President 
Cyd Hoffeld, Vice President 
Sione Ford Naeata, Treasurer 
Greg Tjapkes, Secretary 
 
Judith F. Clark, Executive  
Director   
Network Membership 
 
Access to Independence 
Big Brothers Big Sisters Hawai`i 
Bobby Benson Center 
Child and Family Service 
Coalition for a Drug-Free Hawai`i  
Domestic Violence Action Center 
EPIC `Ohana, Inc. 
Friends of the Children’s Justice 
     Center of Maui 
Get Ready Hawai`i 
Hale Kipa, Inc. 
Hale `Opio Kaua`i, Inc. 
Hawai`i Children’s Action 
     Network 
Hawai`i Health & Harm  
     Reduction Center 
Hawaii Island Community’ 
      Health Center 
Ho`ola Na Pua 
Ho`okele Coalition of Kaua`i 
Ka Hale Pomaika`i 
Kokua Kalihi Valley 
Kaua`i Planning and Action 
     Alliance 
Lines for Life Youth Line 
Maui Youth and Family Services 
Na Pu`uwai Molokai Native 
     Hawaiian Health Care  
     Systems 
P.A.R.E.N.T.S., Inc. 
Parents and Children Together 
PHOCUSED  
Piha Wellness and Healing 
Planned Parenthood of the 
     Great Northwest, Hawaii 
    Alaska, Kentucky, Indiana 
Residential Youth Services 
     & Empowerment (RYSE) 
Salvation Army Family  
     Intervention Services 
Sex Abuse Treatment Center 
Susannah Wesley Community 
     Center 
The Catalyst Group 
 
 
March 24, 2025 
 
 
 
To: 
Representative Kyle Yamashita, Chari, 
And members of the Committee on Finance 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF SB 933 SD2 RELATING TO 
THE STATE BUDGET 
 
Hawaii Youth Services Network (HYSN), a statewide coalition of 
youth-serving organizations, strongly supports SB 933 SD2 Relating 
to the State Budget. 
 
Federal funding for nonprofit organizations provides critically needed 
services for vulnerable children, youth and families. Federal funds 
provide housing, health care, educational services, and protection 
from child abuse and domestic violence. We need these services so 
that children and youth can grow up safe, healthy, and ready to 
Succeed   
 
Hawaii nonprofit organizations currently receive 630 federal grants 
totaling more than S1 billion dollars in the current year. Hawaii Youth 
Services Network has more than $2 million dollars in federal funds 
for services to homeless youth that are at risk. 
 
As the federal administration works on cutting funding for essential 
services, it is essential for our state government to ensure that the 
most needed services are able to continue. 
 
Thank you for this opportunity to testify.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Judith F. Clark, MPH 
Executive Director 

SB-933-SD-2 
Submitted on: 3/24/2025 4:20:18 PM 
Testimony for FIN on 3/27/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Jeannette Gurung 
WOCAN 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and members of the Finance Committee, 
My name is Jeannette Gurung, and I am submitting testimony on behalf of Women Organizing 
for Change in Agriculture and Natural Resource Management (WOCAN)  in strong support of 
SB933 SD2, the “Grant Funding Act of 2025.” This bill is urgently needed to protect nonprofit 
organizations facing federal funding cuts that continue to threaten essential services and jobs 
statewide. 
Hawai‘i’s nonprofits provide critical community services—healthcare, housing, food security, 
legal aid, environmental protection, education, and cultural preservation—reaching hundreds of 
thousands of residents each year. With hundreds of millions of federal funds now at risk, 
nonprofits face program shutdowns, service cuts, and staff layoffs, destabilizing communities 
and increasing demand for state-funded emergency services. Our sector also represents nearly 
12% of the state’s workforce. Hawai‘i’s economy will suffer as our jobs disappear and social 
service gaps grow. 
We support SB933 SD2 and urge the committee to adopt an amendment to expand eligibility, so 
that all nonprofit organizations facing substantial cuts to their programs and staff can apply for 
these critical emergency grants. Expanding eligibility beyond health, human services, and legal 
services to include other sectors such as education, arts, culture, and environment, ensures that 
nonprofits of varying sizes and missions—many of which rely heavily on federal funding—are 
not left behind during this fiscal crisis. 
Mahalo for your support of Hawai‘i’s nonprofits and for championing strong partnerships 
between government and nonprofits. This bill is a critical step toward safeguarding vital services, 
jobs, and community stability during this uncertain and challenging time. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
Mahalo, 
Dr. Jeannette Gurung 
Executive Director 
Women Organizing for Change in Agriculture and Natural Resource Management (WOCAN) 
 

                          Responsive Caregivers of Hawaii 
                          91-1241 Saratoga Avenue, Building 1924 
 
Kapolei, Hawaii 96707 
                           
                       A private, non-profit organization 
 
Phone:  488-7391        Fax:  488-6952        Web site:  www.RCOH.org 
 
 
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and members of the Finance Committee, 
My name is Michael Marsh, and I am submitting testimony on behalf of Responsive Caregivers 
of Hawaii in strong support of SB933 SD2, the “Grant Funding Act of 2025.” This bill is urgently 
needed to protect nonprofit organizations facing federal funding cuts that continue to threaten 
essential services and jobs statewide. 
Hawai‘i’s nonprofits provide critical community services—healthcare, housing, food security, 
legal aid, environmental protection, education, and cultural preservation—reaching hundreds of 
thousands of residents each year. With hundreds of millions of federal funds now at risk, 
nonprofits face program shutdowns, service cuts, and staff layoffs, destabilizing communities 
and increasing demand for state-funded emergency services. Our sector also represents nearly 
12% of the state’s workforce. Hawai‘i’s economy will suffer as our jobs disappear and social 
service gaps grow. 
Through Medicaid, Responsive Caregivers of Hawaii serves well over 100 adults with 
intellectual and developmental disabilities on Oahu. We provide day care, transportation and 
residential care for this vulnerable population that relies on Medicaid for their survival. Without 
sufficient funding, the population would be forced into long-term care that costs significantly 
more money. 
We support SB933 SD2 and urge the committee to adopt an amendment to expand eligibility, 
so that all nonprofit organizations facing substantial cuts to their programs and staff can apply 
for these critical emergency grants. Expanding eligibility beyond health, human services, and 
legal services to include other sectors such as education, arts, culture, and environment, 
ensures that nonprofits of varying sizes and missions—many of which rely heavily on federal 
funding—are not left behind during this fiscal crisis. 
Mahalo for your support of Hawai‘i’s nonprofits and for championing strong partnerships 
between government and nonprofits. This bill is a critical step toward safeguarding vital 
services, jobs, and community stability during this uncertain and challenging time. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
Mahalo, 
Michael P. Marsh, MA, CFRE 
President & CEO 

 
 
  
        
 
 
 
 
March 24, 2025 
 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
Rep. Kyle Yamashita, Chair 
Rep. Jenna Takenouchi, Vice Chair 
 
BILL SB933 SD2 
POSITION: SUPPORT  
 
Hearing Date: Thursday, March 27 at 2:00 pm 
 
Aloha e Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki, and Committee Members: 
 
Aloha United Way strongly supports SB933 SD2, to providing grants to community based 
organizations (CBOs) affected by the federal funding uncertainty, for fiscal year 2025-2026. 
 
Our CBOs provide critical services to Hawaii’s most vulnerable populations. Lives and livelihoods 
are literally on the line as a direct result of the uncertainty created by the recent executive 
orders. The chaos and confusion has caused CBOs to question whether they can continue to 
provide services they provide under these reimbursable grants. 
 
Our CBOs are resourceful and are looking for other funding solutions. However, the gap 
between philanthropic capacity and federal dollars is simply too great, especially given the 
abrupt nature of the funding disruption. This bill will go a long way to provide the funding and 
assurance many of our CBOs need to confidently continue operations and providing the critical 
services our community needs.  
 
SB933 HD1 will help ensure the health and safety of our entire community, not just those 
receiving services, so we urge you to advance this important measure. 
 
Mahalo for the opportunity to testify.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
Michelle Bartell 
President & CEO 
Aloha United Way 
auw.org 
auw211.org 
200 N Vineyard Blvd Suite 700 
Honolulu, HI 96817 
(808) 536-1951 
Fax: (808) 543-2222 

P.O. Box 208 Kula Hi 96790 Ph 808-280-7070 ~ Info@thespirithorseranch.org 
The Spirit Horse Ranch, Inc. is a HI Nonprofit corporation recognized by the IRS as a tax-exempt 
public charity under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code (Federal Tax ID: 86-3879237) 
                                                         
 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF SB933 SD2 
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and Members of the Finance Committee, 
My name is Paige Deponte, and I am submitting testimony on behalf of Spirit Horse Ranch, Inc., in 
strong support of SB933 SD2, the “Grant Funding Act of 2025.” This measure is urgently needed to 
safeguard nonprofit organizations like ours that are on the front lines of Hawai‘i’s mental health and 
trauma recovery efforts, but are now facing significant challenges due to federal funding cuts. 
At Spirit Horse Ranch on Maui, we provide trauma-informed equine-assisted services to children, 
youth, families, and first responders—many of whom have been directly impacted by the August 
2023 wildfires and other life-altering crises. Through nature-based, evidence-supported 
programming, we offer a safe space for healing, resilience building, and emotional regulation. Since 
opening in early 2023, we have served over 2,200 sessions, collaborating with Hawai‘i CARES, 
Maui Youth & Family Services, Hale Pono Shelter, Job Corp and local schools, among many others. 
Like many small community-based nonprofits, our ability to continue offering services without 
interruption depends heavily on outside funding. The current freeze in federal support threatens our 
capacity to maintain staffing, programming, and safe infrastructure—ultimately jeopardizing the 
emotional and mental health of those we serve, especially vulnerable youth in crisis. A loss of 
funding would lead not only to reduced sessions but to the dismantling of a sanctuary that so many 
have come to depend on for healing and hope. 
We urge the committee to adopt an amendment expanding eligibility under SB933 SD2 so that all 
nonprofits—regardless of sector—facing significant program and staffing cuts can access this critical 
grant funding. Organizations providing services in education, arts, culture, the environment, and 
youth trauma recovery, like Spirit Horse Ranch, play an essential role in our statewide safety net and 
must not be excluded from emergency relief. 
Mahalo for your leadership and for supporting Hawai‘i’s nonprofit sector. SB933 SD2 is a vital 
investment in the resilience, well-being, and recovery of our people. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
 
With gratitude, 
Paige Deponte 
Director  
Spirit Horse Ranch, Inc. 

 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF SB933 SD2 
 
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and members of the Finance Committee, 
 
My name is Summer Mochida-Meek, and I am submitting testimony on behalf of Hawaii State Rural 
Health Association (HSRHA) in strong support of SB933 SD2, the “Grant Funding Act of 2025.” This 
bill is urgently needed to protect nonprofit organizations facing federal funding cuts that continue to 
threaten essential services and jobs statewide. 
 
Hawai‘i’s nonprofits provide critical community services—healthcare, housing, food security, legal aid, 
environmental protection, education, and cultural preservation—reaching hundreds of thousands of 
residents each year. With hundreds of millions of federal funds now at risk, nonprofits face program 
shutdowns, service cuts, and staff layoffs, destabilizing communities and increasing demand for state-
funded emergency services. Our sector also represents nearly 12% of the state’s workforce. Hawai‘i’s 
economy will suffer as our jobs disappear and social service gaps grow. 
 
The HSRHA is a nonprofit working to improve health equity for rural and underserved communities 
across Hawai‘i and the U.S.-affiliated Pacific Islands. We focus on addressing provider shortages, 
geographic isolation, and systemic barriers through programs like Project ECHO, TOUCH and REACH, 
which support behavioral health, telehealth access, and workforce development. 
 
We partner with over 2,000 providers and organizations to ensure that essential services reach 
communities with limited options. The federal funding freeze puts these efforts at risk—jeopardizing 
programs, staffing, and hard-won trust in rural areas where consistent care is already fragile. Even short-
term disruptions could have long-term consequences for the people we serve. 
 
We support SB933 SD2 and urge the committee to adopt an amendment to expand eligibility, so that all 
nonprofit organizations facing substantial cuts to their programs and staff can apply for these critical 
emergency grants. Expanding eligibility beyond health, human services, and legal services to include 
other sectors such as education, arts, culture, and environment, ensures that nonprofits of varying sizes 
and missions—many of which rely heavily on federal funding—are not left behind during this fiscal 
crisis. 
 
Mahalo for your support of Hawai‘i’s nonprofits and for championing strong partnerships between 
government and nonprofits. This bill is a critical step toward safeguarding vital services, jobs, and 
community stability during this uncertain and challenging time. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
Mahalo, 
 
 
 
Summer Mochida-Meek 
Executive Director 
Hawaii State Rural Health Association 

 
What Makes You Feel Beautiful 
501(c)(3) Nonprofit Organization | EIN:834396154 
Info@wmyfb.org, WMYFB.org, 808-442-2627 
P.O. BOX 1017 Haiku HI 96708 
Date: 3/25/2025 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF SB933 SD2 
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and members of the Finance Committee, 
My name is Monica Marrow, and I am submitting testimony on behalf of What Makes You Feel 
Beautiful in strong support of SB933 SD2, the “Grant Funding Act of 2025.” This bill is urgently 
needed to protect nonprofit organizations facing federal funding cuts that continue to threaten 
essential services and jobs statewide. 
Hawai‘i’s nonprofits provide critical community services—healthcare, housing, food security, 
legal aid, environmental protection, education, and cultural preservation—reaching hundreds of 
thousands of residents each year. With hundreds of millions of federal funds now at risk, 
nonprofits face program shutdowns, service cuts, and staff layoffs, destabilizing communities 
and increasing demand for state-funded emergency services. Our sector also represents nearly 
12% of the state’s workforce. Hawai‘i’s economy will suffer as our jobs disappear and social 
service gaps grow. 
What Makes You Feel Beautiful (WMYFB) is a Maui-based 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization 
dedicated to helping women and girls discover their inner strength and build confidence through 
programs focused on self-love, mental health, and personal development. Our signature 
program, MAUI GEMS, provides young women from low-income, marginalized families and 
Tier One schools with mentorship, life skills, and leadership training, guiding them toward 
emotional resilience and personal growth. Through weekly meetings, summer internships, and 
community workshops, we empower girls aged 13 to 19 to navigate life’s challenges with 
confidence and a sense of self-worth. 
Our work is rooted in the understanding that mental health and self-love are foundational to 
personal and community well-being. We have witnessed firsthand how young girls who enter 

our program uncertain and insecure blossom into confident leaders who contribute positively to 
their communities. One of our participants, Shanti, joined MAUI GEMS at a time when she 
struggled with confidence. Through the support of her mentors and the skills gained in our 
workshops, she found her voice, completed an internship with a local business, and is now 
heading to college with a renewed sense of purpose and strength. 
Although WMYFB does not currently receive federal funding, we are actively pursuing 
opportunities to secure federal grants to expand our services and increase our impact. Without 
access to this funding, we face the risk of limiting the number of girls we serve and scaling back 
vital components of our program, including stipends for our youth interns, meeting spaces, 
program materials, and mental health and leadership training. The loss of these opportunities 
would be devastating for the vulnerable young women and families we serve—leaving gaps in 
critical support and increasing the pressure on state-funded emergency services as more youth 
face mental health challenges and social instability without the safety net that WMYFB provides. 
WMYFB serves over 75 young women each year through MAUI GEMS and other community 
outreach efforts. Our impact extends beyond individual lives—strengthening families, improving 
mental health outcomes, and cultivating future community leaders. Continued support through 
SB933 SD2 would ensure that we can sustain and grow this vital work, allowing us to reach 
more youth and help them unlock their potential during a time when they need it most. 
We strongly urge the committee to pass SB933 SD2 with expanded eligibility, ensuring that 
organizations like ours—focused on mental health, education, and youth development—are not 
left behind during this financial crisis. Your support will allow us to continue empowering Maui’s 
next generation of confident, resilient young women. 
We support SB933 SD2 and urge the committee to adopt an amendment to expand eligibility, so 
that all nonprofit organizations facing substantial cuts to their programs and staff can apply for 
these critical emergency grants. Expanding eligibility beyond health, human services, and legal 
services to include other sectors such as education, arts, culture, and environment, ensures that 
nonprofits of varying sizes and missions—many of which rely heavily on federal funding—are 
not left behind during this fiscal crisis. 
Mahalo for your support of Hawai‘i’s nonprofits and for championing strong partnerships 
between government and nonprofits. This bill is a critical step toward safeguarding vital 
services, jobs, and community stability during this uncertain and challenging time. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
Mahalo,​
Monica Marrow​
Executive Director​
What Makes You Feel Beautiful​
 
 

SB-933-SD-2 
Submitted on: 3/25/2025 8:16:15 AM 
Testimony for FIN on 3/27/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
James Kilgore 
Full Life 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and members of the Finance Committee, 
My name is Jim Kilgore and I am submitting testimony on behalf of Full Life in strong support 
of SB933 SD2, the "Grant Funding Act of 2025." This bill is needed to protect essential services 
provided by nonprofit organizations facing federal funding cuts. 
Full Life provides critical home and community-based services for people with intellectual and 
developmental disabilities on Hawai'i Island. Funding is based on a blend of state general funds 
and the federal Medicaid match  (FMAP).  
Mahalo for your support of Hawai'is nonprofits and the opportunity to testify. 
 

SB-933-SD-2 
Submitted on: 3/25/2025 8:27:01 AM 
Testimony for FIN on 3/27/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Olena Alec 
Haleakala Conservancy 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and members of the Finance Committee, 
My name is Olena Alec, and I am submitting testimony on behalf of Haleakala Conservancy in 
strong support of SB933 SD2. 
Haleakalā Conservancy was established in 2019 as the formal Philanthropic Partner of Haleakala 
National Park, given the sole mission of supporting projects and programs that the Park does not 
have the funding to independently accomplish. Like many other non-profit park partners, such as 
Grand Canyon Conservancy and Yosemite Conservancy, we exist in direct partnership with our 
Park to fill the gaps. 
Haleakala Conservancy exists to support our Park, and as nonprofit, some of our funding is 
under a freeze and our ability to support our Park will be directly impacted by the federal cuts to 
funding. All of this is happening as our Park is facing unprecedented challenges, with the 
ongoing hiring freeze, instability in staffing, and new operational hurdles. These challenges are 
being felt across the National Park Service, but as the only National Park on Maui, with the most 
endangered species of ANY National Park, AND serving as a major economic driver for our 
local businesses, it is up to us to protect it.  
We support SB933 SD2 and urge the committee to adopt an amendment to expand eligibility, so 
that nonprofit organizations like ours facing substantial cuts to their programs and staff can apply 
for these critical emergency grants. Expanding eligibility ensures that nonprofits of varying sizes 
and missions—many of which rely heavily on federal funding—are not left behind during this 
fiscal crisis. 
Mahalo for your support of Hawai‘i’s nonprofits and for championing strong partnerships 
between government and nonprofits. This bill is a critical step toward safeguarding vital services, 
jobs, and community stability during this uncertain and challenging time. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
Mahalo, 
Olena Alec 
Executive Director 

Haleakala Conservancy 
 

SB-933-SD-2 
Submitted on: 3/25/2025 9:18:45 AM 
Testimony for FIN on 3/27/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Paul Normann 
Neighborhood Place of 
Puna 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha, 
Given the current instablity in the Federal government and the ongoing threats to fedaral 
programs that support our most vulnerable citizens, Neighborhood Place of Puna encourages you 
to support SB933. While NPP gets limited Federal dollars, the devistating impact to our 
community if funding for core programs like SNAP, TANF, SSI, SSDI, Section 8, Homeless 
Shelters and supports would be quickly apparrent in our Island state. Already, we see too many 
Kupuna, Families, and Foster Youth falling into homelessness. Imagine what it would look like 
if suddenly there was no funding for Shelters or drastically reduced funding for rental assistance. 
Homelessness, which is already bad, would become the way of life for many people who are 
struggling to stay housed out the moment. That is just one example, I am sure the negative 
impacts will be far reaching. 
Please support bill SB933 
Paul Normann, Executive Director 
 

 
  
March 27, 2025   
  
RE: Support for SB 933, SD2 Relating to the State Budget  
  
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and members of the committee,  
  
On behalf of Hawaiʻi Foodbank, I express our support for SB 933, SD2, the “Grant Funding Act of 2025.” 
This bill appropriates moneys for grants for ﬁscal year 2025-2026 and subjects recipient organizations to 
certain requirements.  This.bill.is.urgently.needed.to.protect.nonproﬁt.organizations.facing.federal.funding.
cuts.that.continue.to.threaten.essential.services.and.jobs.statewide¡ 
  
For over 40 years, Hawai‘i Foodbank has provided daily and emergency assistance to those facing food 
insecurity in Hawai‘i. As the state's leading hunger-relief organization, Hawai‘i Foodbank distributes food 
to families and individuals on Oʿahu and in Kauaʿi County through direct service programs and through 
our network of 266 agency partners and pantries. Last quarter, we served an average of 171,000 people 
per month on the islands of Oahu and Kauai. That’s twice the number we supported before the pandemic, 
and a 13% increase over last year at this same time. 
 
Federal funding plays a critical role in our operations. About 20% of our revenue comes from federal 
sources, primarily through USDA program contracts administered by the State. We also receive and 
distribute federal commodities foods through two key programs: the emergency food assistance program 
(TEFAP) and our senior food box program (CSFP). Last year, the dollar value of those foods was $6.6m, 
accounting for about 22% of the value of all the food we distributed. 
 
We are working hard to understand the implications of changes that are happening with federal funding 
and federal programs for our families and neighbors facing hunger – as well as our network of hunger-relief 
partners.  Looking ahead, if all federal funding were to stop (excluding food), we could face a potential loss 
of $3.8 - 5 million in revenue.  
 
TEFAP is also a really important food program for us. Increased bonus shipments through the Commodity 
Credit Corporation (CCC) program have helped meet growing demand. This year so far, CCC-funded 
bonus products have made up about 44% of the TEFAP foods we have received. However, CCC funding is 
likely ending. Seven anticipated CCC-funded shipments, scheduled between now and July, have been 
marked as “returned” to FNS, which most likely means they will be canceled. That’s $300k worth of food, 
frozen chicken, pork, eggs, for O‘ahu alone—and represents more than $550,000 statewide. If CCC 
funding is completely discontinued, we anticipate losing $2.3m worth of CCC funded food this ﬁscal year. 
 
Amid this uncertainty, hunger continues to persist at some of the highest levels we’ve ever seen. Currently, 
nearly 1 in 3 Hawai‘i households continue to struggle with food insecurity; 10% of our households are 
going for full days without eating, some or most months of the year; and 6% of our KIDS are going full days 
without eating. 
 
 

 
 
 
We support SB933 SD2 and urge the committee to adopt an amendment to expand eligibility, so that all 
nonproﬁt organizations facing substantial cuts to their programs and staff can apply for these critical 
emergency grants. Expanding eligibility beyond health, human services, and legal services to include 
other sectors such as education, arts, culture, and environment, ensures that nonproﬁts of varying sizes 
and missions—many of which rely heavily on federal funding—are not left behind during this ﬁscal crisis. 
 
Mahalo for your support of Hawai‘i’s nonproﬁts and for championing strong partnerships between 
government and nonproﬁts. This bill is a critical step toward safeguarding vital services, jobs, and 
community stability during this uncertain and challenging time. 
   
With aloha,    
   
Amy Miller    
President and CEO, Hawai‘i Foodbank    

TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF SB933 SD2 
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and members of the Finance Committee, 
My name is Chad Hasegawa, and I am submitting testimony on behalf of Hawaii County 
Economic Opportunity Council (HCEOC) in strong support of SB933 SD2, the “Grant Funding 
Act of 2025.” This bill is urgently needed to protect nonprofit organizations facing federal funding 
cuts that continue to threaten essential services and jobs statewide. 
As the Big Island’s Community Action Agency HCEOC has served Hawaii County with the 
mission of alleviating and mitigating the impact of poverty through programs funded by federal, 
state, and county grants. For the past 60 years HCEOC has provided such federally funded 
programs as Weatherization Assistance Program, Low Income Energy Assistance Program, 
and Senior Farmers Market Nutrition Program, to name a few. The freezing or elimination of 
funding for such programs will not only impact our community by the reduction of services 
rendered but also result in a reduction in HCEOC’s staffing that provide those services. 
Hawai‘i’s nonprofits provide critical community services—healthcare, housing, food security, 
legal aid, environmental protection, education, and cultural preservation—reaching hundreds of 
thousands of residents each year. With hundreds of millions of federal funds now at risk, 
nonprofits face program shutdowns, service cuts, and staff layoffs, destabilizing communities 
and increasing demand for state-funded emergency services. Our sector also represents nearly 
12% of the state’s workforce. Hawai‘i’s economy will suffer as our jobs disappear and social 
service gaps grow. 
We support SB933 SD2 and urge the committee to adopt an amendment to expand eligibility, 
so that all nonprofit organizations facing substantial cuts to their programs and staff can apply 
for these critical emergency grants. Expanding eligibility beyond health, human services, and 
legal services to include other sectors such as education, arts, culture, and environment, 
ensures that nonprofits of varying sizes and missions—many of which rely heavily on federal 
funding—are not left behind during this fiscal crisis. 
Mahalo for your support of Hawai‘i’s nonprofits and for championing strong partnerships 
between government and nonprofits. This bill is a critical step toward safeguarding vital 
services, jobs, and community stability during this uncertain and challenging time. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
Mahalo, 
Chad Hasegawa 
Executive Director 
Hawaii County Economic Opportunity Council 
 
 

 
 
70170 
  
Nickolas Kacprowski 
Board President  
Rachel Figueroa 
Executive Director  
  
545 Queen Street, Suite 100 
Honolulu, Hawai`i 96813  
Phone: (808) 528-7050  
Fax: (808) 524-2147  
 www.vlsh.org  
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF S.B. 933, SD2 
RELATING TO THE STATE BUDGET 
Committee on Finance – March 27, 2025  2:00 p.m. 
 
  
CHAIR YAMASHITA, VICE CHAIR TAKENOUCHI AND MEMBERS OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE:   
  
Volunteer Legal Services Hawai‘i supports the passage of S.B. 933, SD2. 
 
Volunteer Legal is concerned about the federal actions limiting services to those residents who 
need it the most.  We are more worried than ever about the impact that the limiting of services has on 
the safety net of legal services.  
 
Volunteer Legal supports the inclusion of grant monies for the Judiciary for agencies affected 
by the loss of federal funding.   
 
 In the last forty-four years, Volunteer Legal has partnered with volunteer attorneys in the 
provision of civil legal assistance to individuals and families of Hawaii.  While Volunteer Legal 
Services Hawai‘i’s only office is on Oahu, we service residents of Hawai‘i statewide.  In 2024, with 
only a staff of 9, Volunteer Legal qualified around 1000 individuals. Volunteer Legal provides legal 
checkups, educational presentations, clinics, brief services and/or full representations.  Twenty-one 
(21%) of those helped are homeless or at the risk of being homeless, 28% of those helped suffer from 
domestic violence, 6% of those helped were veterans, 26% of those helped are disabled, and 20% of 
those helped were aged 60 and over.  If not for Volunteer Legal Services Hawai‘i, these individuals 
would have otherwise gone without legal help.   
 
Volunteer Legal Services Hawai‘i thanks the committee for the past support of legal services 
in the budget. We respectfully request your passage of S.B. 933, SD2.  Thank you for this opportunity 
to provide testimony.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely,  
Rachel Figueroa, Executive Director 
 
 

 
    C L A R E N C E  T .  C .  C H I N G  C A M P U S   1 8 2 2  K e ‘ e a u m o k u  S t r e e t ,  H o n o l u l u ,  H I  9 6 8 2 2  
    P h o n e  ( 8 0 8 ) 5 2 7 - 4 8 1 3    
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF SB 933, SD2:  RELATING TO THE STATE BUDGET 
 
TO:  
House Committee on Finance 
FROM: 
Tina Andrade, President and CEO, Catholic Charities Hawai‘i 
Hearing: 
Thursday, March 27, 2025 @ 2:00 pm;  CR 308 & videoconference 
 
Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and Members of the Committee: 
Catholic Charities Hawai‘i (CCH) appreciates the opportunity to submit testimony in Strong 
Support of SB 933, SD2, the “Grant Funding Act of 2025.” This critical legislation will provide 
emergency state grants to stabilize Hawai‘i’s nonprofit sector in the face of potential federal 
funding cuts, ensuring continued access to essential services for our most vulnerable residents. 
For over 77 years, CCH has been committed to serving Hawai‘i’s communities, providing social 
services to children, families, elders, individuals experiencing homelessness, veterans, and 
immigrants. Through our experience providing services in Hawai’i, we witness firsthand the vital 
role nonprofits play in delivering health and human services, affordable housing assistance, and 
crisis intervention programs. 
Hawai‘i’s Community-Based Organizations (CBOs) are at a financial crossroads. With looming 
federal funding freezes, CBOs that serve traditionally marginalized and underserved 
communities are at risk of severe disruption. This bill will help to ensure uninterrupted access to 
critical health and human services and stabilize CBOs in the face of federal funding 
uncertainties.  SB 933, SB2 will safeguard essential programs that provide vital support to 
underserved communities. Additionally, this measure will protect CBOs positions, which make 
up nearly 12% of Hawai‘i’s workforce, helping to prevent widespread layoffs and the economic 
instability that would follow. Strengthening Hawai‘i’s local economy by keeping CBOs 
operational will also reduce the strain on public assistance programs while ensuring continued 
support for community well-being. 
With the potential loss of millions in federal funding in 2025, the passage and full funding of SB 
933, SB2 is a necessary investment to prevent service disruptions and ensure that CBOs can 
continue meeting critical community needs. An investment in CBOs is an investment in 
Hawai‘i’s future, reinforcing public health, economic stability, and social resilience. 
Catholic Charities Hawai’i urges the Legislature to pass SB 933, SD2, and prioritize the financial 
stability of Hawai‘i’s nonprofit sector. If you have any questions, please contact Shellie Niles at 
(808) 527-4813. Thank you for your time and consideration.   
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
RepresentaƟve Kyle Yamashita, Chair 
RepresentaƟve Jenna Takenouchi, Vice Chair 
CommiƩee on Finance 
 
Thursday, March 27, 2025; 2:00 p.m.; Agenda #1 
Conference room 308 & Videoconference 
 
RE:  SB 933 SD2 RelaƟng to the State Budget – In Support 
 
Dear Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi and Members of the CommiƩee, 
 
I am wriƟng on behalf of Child and Family Service (CFS) to express our strong support of SB 
933 SD2, which appropriates moneys for grants for ﬁscal year 2025-2026. 
 
Through the uƟlizaƟon of our core H.O.P.E. values (Humility, Ownership, Perseverance and 
Engagement), our programs aim to help Hawaii’s most vulnerable populaƟons to 
strengthen families and foster the healthy development of children.  We work directly with 
individuals and families to break cycles of violence and foster environments where children 
and families can thrive.  Children, individuals experiencing homelessness, survivors of 
domesƟc violence and many other groups rely on the safety nets provided by CFS and other 
community-based organizaƟons.  However, stagnant funding levels and rising operaƟonal 
costs, especially following crises like the Maui wildﬁres, have pushed community-based 
organizaƟons to the brink. 
 
Given the ongoing uncertainly of federal spending on social service programs, SB 933 SD2 
will directly address an urgent funding gap that may jeopardize the criƟcal services Hawaii 
families depend on.  This bill is necessary so Hawaii’s communiƟes can conƟnue to receive 
the assistance they need, regardless of federal budget changes.  
 
We respecƞully urge you to pass this measure to ensure Hawaii’s most vulnerable 
populaƟons receive the protecƟon and assistance they deserve.  Thank you. 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Amanda Pump 
President & CEO 
Child & Family Service 

   
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF SB933 SD2 
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and members of the Finance Committee, 
My name is Deloris Guttman, and I am submitting testimony on behalf of the African American Diversity Cultural 
Center Hawaii (AADCCH) dba Obama Hawaiian Africana Museum] in strong support of SB933 SD2, the “Grant 
Funding Act of 2025.” This bill is urgently needed to protect nonprofit organizations facing federal funding cuts that 
continue to threaten essential services and jobs statewide. 
My organization is one of Hawai‘i’s nonprofits that provides critical community services—healthcare, housing, food 
security, legal aid, environmental protection, education, and cultural preservation—reaching hundreds of thousands 
of residents each year. With hundreds of millions of federal funds now at risk, nonprofits face program shutdowns, 
service cuts, and staff layoffs, destabilizing communities and increasing demand for state-funded emergency services. 
Our sector also represents nearly 12% of the state’s workforce. Hawai‘i’s economy will suffer as our jobs disappear 
and social service gaps grow. 
AADCCH’s mission: To Preserve. Perpetuate, & promote the early settlers & contemporaries' contributions in shaping 
Hawaii cultural history for over 200 years to educate K!2 Students, Residents & Visitors.  The federal funding freeze 
will have an impact on the grants submitted for our community outreach program services. 
We support SB933 SD2 and urge the committee to adopt an amendment to expand eligibility, so that all nonprofit 
organizations facing substantial cuts to their programs and staff can apply for these critical emergency grants. 
Expanding eligibility beyond health, human services, and legal services to include other sectors such as education, 
arts, culture, and environment, ensures that nonprofits of varying sizes and missions—many of which rely heavily on 
federal funding—are not left behind during this fiscal crisis. 
Mahalo for your support of Hawai‘i’s nonprofits and for championing strong partnerships between government and 
nonprofits. This bill is a critical step toward safeguarding vital services, jobs, and community stability during this 
uncertain and challenging time.        
                                                                                                                                                
Deloris Guttman   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      President/Museum 
Director 

 
 
To: State of Hawaii, House of Representatives Finance Committee 
From: Emily Lau, Vice President of Mission Services, Goodwill Hawaii 
Date: March 25th, 2025 
RE: Testimony in Support of SB933 SD2 
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and members of the Finance Committee, 
My name is Emily Lau, and I am submitting testimony on behalf of Goodwill Hawaii in strong support of 
SB933 SD2, the “Grant Funding Act of 2025.” This bill is urgently needed to protect nonprofit 
organizations facing federal funding cuts that continue to threaten essential services and jobs 
statewide. 
Hawai‘i’s nonprofits provide critical community services—healthcare, housing, food security, legal aid, 
environmental protection, education, and cultural preservation—reaching hundreds of thousands of 
residents each year. With hundreds of millions of federal funds now at risk, nonprofits face program 
shutdowns, service cuts, and staff layoffs, destabilizing communities and increasing demand for state-
funded emergency services. Our sector also represents nearly 12% of the state’s workforce. Hawai‘i’s 
economy will suffer as our jobs disappear and social service gaps grow. 
Goodwill Hawaii’s mission is to help people with employment barriers reach their full potential and 
become self-sufficient through the power of work. We serve more than 7,000 people each year 
statewide—individuals who are often overlooked by traditional systems, including adults with 
disabilities, at-risk youth, ex-offenders, immigrants, and families receiving public assistance. 
A large part of our programs are funded by federal contracts, which allow us to provide vital services 
such as job training, youth education, and employment placement. One example is our Volunteer 
Income Tax Assistance (VITA) program, which helps low-income individuals and families file their taxes 
for free. Last year alone, we helped over 3,000 people maximize their refunds—money that goes 
directly back into the local economy. A potential loss of this federal grant could eliminate the program 
altogether, leaving thousands without access to this critical financial service and increasing their risk of 
falling behind economically. 
The impact of a broader federal funding freeze or executive orders could force us to reduce services, 
lay off staff, and cut support to those who need it most. Programs that help people secure employment, 
gain financial stability, or access basic needs like food and education would shrink or disappear. Staff 
positions that deliver direct services to individuals with disabilities, low-income families, and at-risk 
youth would be at risk—further straining our communities. Without intervention, thousands of residents 
who rely on these federally funded programs may lose essential lifelines, pushing more people into 
poverty and increasing reliance on emergency state-funded services. 

 
 
We support SB933 SD2 and urge the committee to adopt an amendment to expand eligibility, so that all 
nonprofit organizations facing substantial cuts to their programs and staff can apply for these critical 
emergency grants. Expanding eligibility beyond health, human services, and legal services to include 
other sectors such as education, arts, culture, and environment, ensures that nonprofits of varying sizes 
and missions—many of which rely heavily on federal funding—are not left behind during this fiscal 
crisis. 
Mahalo for your support of Hawai‘i’s nonprofits and for championing strong partnerships between 
government and nonprofits. This bill is a critical step toward safeguarding vital services, jobs, and 
community stability during this uncertain and challenging time. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
Mahalo, 
Emily Lau 
Vice President of Mission Services 
Goodwill Hawaii  

 
 
Telephone: (808) 536-4302 • Fax: (808) 527-8088 
Mailing Address: P.O. Box 37375 •  Honolulu, Hawaii  96837-0375 
924 Bethel Street •  Honolulu, Hawaii   96813 
 
 
 
David Kauila Kopper 
Executive Director 
 
 
 
 
 
www.legalaidhawaii.org 
A UNITED WAY AGENCY 
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY ON SB933 
 
Committee on Finance 
 
Representative Kyle T. Yamashita, Chair 
Representative Jenna Takenouchi, Vice Chair 
The Legal Aid Society of Hawaii submits testimony in strong support of SB933-Relating to the 
State Budget. This legislation, the Grant Funding Act of 2025, seeks to provide funding for one-
time nonrecurring grants to organizations that provide critical services. Legal Aid supports the 
general intent of this bill, and thanks this Committee and the legislature for considering and 
including funding for the Judiciary for program appropriations and other expenditures. 
IMPACT OF SB933 
With the support of Federal, State, County and private funding, grants and contracts, Legal Aid 
provides critical civil legal services to our low-income and vulnerable populations across our state. 
As the state’s largest and oldest legal service provider, we deliver legal services in the areas most 
needed by Hawaiʻi’s residents, including family law, housing, domestic abuse, consumer 
protection, immigration law, public benefits, child welfare, and elder law. Legal Aid provides these 
services statewide through its 12 offices located in every county and on every island, as well as 
through our Maui Disaster Legal Services office and our Hawaiʻi Immigrant Justice Center. Our 
over 100 dedicated staff are all committed to our mission of obtaining a fair and just Hawaiʻi for 
all. 
Each year, Legal Aid impacts the lives of approximately 20,000 Hawaiʻi residents. In the last fiscal 
year, we received over 15,000 requests for assistance and were able to provide legal help in a little 
over 7000 cases in legal areas ranging from family, housing, consumer, foreclosure, public 
benefits, elder law, homelessness, immigration, language access, and child welfare. Of those 
served last year, over 2,000 of our clients were homeless or at risk for homelessness, over 1,600 
are Native Hawaiian, over 1,200 experienced domestic violence and about 700 spoke a primary 
language other than English.  
NEED FOR STABLE FUNDING 
We are grateful to the legislature for their past and continuing support of general civil legal services 
in the Judiciary budget, and to the Judiciary for providing a home for this program and 
administering these important funds. However, more funding is urgently needed. 
In Legal Services Corporation’s Justice Gap Report (2022), researchers found that “low-income 
[individuals] did not receive any or enough legal help for 92% of their civil legal problems[,]” 

 
 
and that Hawaiʻi is unfortunately consistent with this national average. More than one-half of 
people nationwide have no confidence that they would be able to find a lawyer they could afford 
if they needed one. In Hawaiʻi, at least 72% of households had one or more civil legal problems 
in the past year. Current resources are not meeting our community’s needs: the National Justice 
Index determined that nine times as many legal services attorneys and advocates are needed to 
meet Hawaiʻi low-income residents’ legal needs. 
 
We are sensitive to the fact that the State is facing significant fiscal pressures due to potential 
federal funding cuts. In addition, changes to the federal funding and policy landscape also 
require additional support for Hawaiʻi’s legal services providers. Legal Aid is approximately 
45% federally funded. Recently, there have been dramatic reductions in available federal funds 
for victims of crime and domestic-violence survivors. Legal Aid receives substantial federal 
funds to provide services related to housing, assisting Hawaiʻi’s houseless communities, kūpuna 
legal services, health insurance navigators, and more. Disaster legal services, which includes 
over one million in funding for Hawaiʻi, was also recently left out of the most recent funding 
resolution. And, we may see attempts to reduce funding for legal services overall. 
 
We thank this Committee in advance for its consideration and support of the Judiciary's inclusion 
in this bill.  We also thank the Judiciary for their willingness to house any “program 
appropriations” administered under this bill, their support for legal services and their dedication 
to access to justice and fairness. 
 
Mahalo for this opportunity to provide testimony. 
 
Sincerely, 
David Kaulia Kopper  
Executive Director, Legal Aid Society of Hawaiʻi 
 
 
 
 

 
Hawai‘i State Coalition Against Domestic Violence 
P.O. Box 214, Honolulu, HI 96810 
(808) 832-9316 www.hscadv.org 
 
March 27, 2025 
 
Members of the House Committee on Finance:
Chair Kyle T. Yamashita 
Vice Chair Jenna Takenouchi 
Rep. Tina Nakada Grandinetti 
Rep. Daniel Holt 
Rep. Ikaika Hussey 
Rep. Sue L. Keohokapu-Lee Loy 
Rep. Lisa Kitagawa 
Rep. Matthias Kusch 
Rep. Rachele F. Lamosao 
Rep. Mike Lee 
Rep. Tyson K. Miyake 
Rep. Dee Morikawa 
Rep. Shirley Ann Templo 
Rep. David Alcos III 
Rep. Julie Reyes Oda 
Rep. Gene Ward
 
Re: SB933 SD2 Relating to Child Welfare Services 
 
Dear Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and Members of the House Committee on 
Finance: 
 
The Hawaiʻi State Coalition Against Domestic Violence (HSCADV) addresses the social, 
political, and economic impacts of domestic violence on individuals, families, and communities.  
We are the association of domestic violence programs and shelters statewide.  Collectively, our 
member programs serve thousands of survivors of domestic violence and their children.  
Annually, they provide more than 30,000 shelter nights and answer more than 4,000 hotline 
calls – providing advocacy, safety planning, and other resources to survivors. 
On behalf of HSCADV and our 25 member programs statewide, I respectfully submit 
testimony in strong support of SB933 SD2, the “Grant Funding Act of 2025.” This bill is urgently 
needed to protect nonprofit organizations facing federal funding cuts that continue to threaten 
essential services and jobs statewide. 
Hawai‘i’s nonprofits provide critical community services—healthcare, housing, food 
security, legal aid, environmental protection, education, and cultural preservation—to 
hundreds of thousands of residents each year. With hundreds of millions of federal funds now 
at risk, nonprofits face program shutdowns, service cuts, and staff layoffs, destabilizing 
communities and increasing demand for state-funded emergency services.  Our sector also 
represents nearly 12% of the state’s workforce.  Hawai‘i’s economy will suffer as our jobs 
disappear and social service gaps grow. 
We support SB933 SD2 and urge the committee to adopt an amendment to expand 
eligibility, so that all nonprofit organizations facing substantial cuts to their programs and staff 

HSCADV Testimony SB933 SD2 
March 27, 2025 
Page 2 of 2 
 
Hawai‘i State Coalition Against Domestic Violence 
P.O. Box 214, Honolulu, HI 96810 
(808) 832-9316 www.hscadv.org 
 
can apply for these critical emergency grants. Expanding eligibility beyond health, human 
services, and legal services to include other sectors, such as education, arts, culture, and 
environment, ensures that nonprofits of varying sizes and missions—many of which rely heavily 
on federal funding—are not left behind during this fiscal crisis. 
Mahalo for your support of Hawai‘i’s nonprofits and for championing strong 
partnerships between government and nonprofits. This bill is a critical step toward safeguarding 
vital services, jobs, and community stability during this uncertain and challenging time. 
 
Sincerely, 
Angelina Mercado, Executive Director 

Hawai`i True Cost Coalition 
1099 Alakea Street, Suite 2530, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813 | (808) 447-1840 
 
Date:  March 27, 2025  
Re:  
Support of SB933 SD2, Relating to the State Budget  
 
 
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and Members of the Committee,  
 
Our coalition of organizations for Hawaiʻi True Cost Coalition are writing in support of SB933 SD2, 
Relating to the State Budget. The bill SB933 SD2 provides one-time, nonrecurring grants to organizations 
that offer critical services, such as health care, social services, child care, subsidized housing, and 
homeless services, in accordance with Chapter 42F of the Hawaii Revised Statutes. This funding is 
intended to support community-based organizations (CBOs) affected by the federal funding freeze. 
 
The Hawai‘i True Cost Coalition is an alliance of over 70 community-based nonprofit organizations 
serving more than 500,000 residents statewide. Since its establishment in 2020, the coalition has 
focused on strengthening collaboration between nonprofits and the state to ensure taxpayer funds are 
allocated equitably and efficiently. By advocating for sustainable funding solutions, the coalition helps 
safeguard critical services for Hawai‘i's most vulnerable populations, including children, kupuna, 
individuals experiencing homelessness, and survivors of domestic violence. These efforts are essential to 
ensuring that nonprofit organizations can continue providing the vital care and support on which so 
many residents rely.  
  
Hawai‘i’s safety net often goes unnoticed—until it begins to fray. This safety net consists of community-
based nonprofit organizations (CBOs) that provide essential services to tens of thousands of residents 
every day. These organizations offer shelter for at-risk youth, meals for kupuna, aid for survivors of 
domestic violence, and countless other supports that touch every corner of the state. Without 
immediate action, many of these programs could disappear entirely, leaving some of Hawai‘i’s most 
vulnerable residents without the critical support they need to thrive.  
 
HB933 SD2 aids crises initiated by the federal funding freeze by supporting community-based 
organizations and their crucial operations. This measure promotes community well-being while 
strengthening Hawai‘i’s social safety net for the future. Investing now secures vital support for years to 
come.  
 
Mahalo for the opportunity to testify on this important measure.  
 
 

SB-933-SD-2 
Submitted on: 3/26/2025 9:10:07 AM 
Testimony for FIN on 3/27/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
amy agbayani 
The Legal Clinic 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
 
The Legal Clinic (TLC) supports SB933, SD2, which provides funds to the 
Executive and Judiciary for grants to non-profit  organizations.  TLC is a Hawai‘i 
nonprofit, nonpartisan organization providing direct legal service to low income 
immigrants.    Hawaii’s nonprofit sector provides critical social safety net services 
to the community, including the immigrant and migrant population.  TLC 
supports increased funding for Hawaii’s nonprofit community, given the reduced 
assistance from the federal administration.  SB933, SD 2 is necessary to help 
nonprofits in these uncertain fiscal times. Thank you for the opportunity to testify 
in support of SB933, SD2, and TLC respectfully urges the Committee members to 
pass this measure. 
Very respectfully yours, 
Amy Agbayani, Advocacy chair The Legal Clinic 
1020 South Beretania St., Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96814  
 

 
 
Date:  March 25, 2025 
  
To:​
Representative Kyle T. Yamashita, Chair 
Representative Jenna Takenouchi, Vice Chair​​
​
​
Members of the House Committee on Finance  
 
RE:      ​Support for SB 933 SD2, Relating to the State Budget   
  
Hrg:   ​Thursday, March 27, 2025, at 2:00 PM, Conference Room 308 
_________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
The Hawai‘i Public Health Institute,1 supports SB 933 SD2, relating to the state 
budget. This bill appropriates money for grants for fiscal year 2025-2026. 
 
Nonprofit organizations deliver critical services to our community. Investing in 
nonprofits provides financial support for organizations that uplift public health, 
care for our environment, improve learning outcomes for our keiki, and preserve 
the cultural heritage of our island home.  
 
Funding Disparities  
Local nonprofits “serve over 500,000 residents statewide by providing a diverse 
range of essential services–from food security and housing assistance to domestic 
violence support and care for seniors.”2 
 
Yet, in recent years, increases in funding for nonprofits have not been enough to 
offset the cost of services. As operational expenses for nonprofits have risen, 
governments have reduced public support for nonprofits as a percentage of their 
overall budgets, a trend that has been ongoing since the 1980s. 
 
Federal cuts could reduce funding even more and eliminate these services 
entirely. Federal funding accounts for over 60% of Hawai‘i Public Health 
Institute’s overall budget. The essential programs and services we and other 
nonprofits provide may require state funding in order to continue supporting our 
communities. 
 
Building Community Resilience  
A 2022 survey conducted by the True Cost Coalition found that 40% of all 
organizations surveyed felt they may not be able to continue to operate in Hawai‘i 
if government funding challenges are not addressed.3 The survey further found  
3 https://hitruecost.com/resources/2022-survey-results 
2 “Hawaii’s Quiet Crisis: Nonprofits Sound Alarm on Underfunding Peril” - Institute for 
Human Services. https://ihshawaii.org/true-cost 
1 Hawai‘i Public Health Institute’s mission is to advance health and wellness for the people 
and islands of Hawai‘i. We do this through expanding our understanding of what creates 
health of people and place, fostering partnerships , and cultivating programs to improve 
policies, systems, and the environments where people live, learn, work, age, and play. 
707 Richards Street, Suite 300 • Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96813 • hiphi.org 
HIPHI Board 
May Okihiro, MD, MS​
Chair​
John A. Burns School of Medicine, 
Department of Pediatrics 
Titiimaea Ta’ase, JD​
Secretary​
State of Hawai‘i, Deputy Public Defender 
Carissa Holley, MEd​
Treasurer​
Hale Makua Health Services 
Debbie Erskine​
ARCH-MEPS Consulting LLC, Owner 
Camonia Graham - Tutt, PhD​
University of Hawai‘i – West O‘ahu  
Jennifer José Lo, MD​
Hawai‘i Health Partners 
Misty Pacheco, DrPH​
University of Hawai‘i at Hilo 
Kathleen Roche, MS, RN, CENP​
Kaiser Permanente 
Dina Shek, JD​
Medical-Legal Partnership​
For Children in Hawai‘i 
Garret Sugai​
HMSA 
JoAnn Tsark, MPH​
John A. Burns School of Medicine, Native 
Hawaiian Research Office 
HIPHI Initiatives 
Coalition for a​
Tobacco-Free Hawai‘i 
Community-Based Research & 
Evaluation 
Community Health​
Worker Initiatives 
COVID-19 Response 
Environmental Health 
Hawai‘i Drug & Alcohol-Free Coalitions 
Hawai‘i Farm to School Network 
Hawaiʻi Oral Health Coalition 
Hawai‘i Public Health Training Hui 
Healthy Eating + Active Living 
Kūpuna Collective/Healthy Aging & 
Community Living 
Public Health Workforce Development 

 
that 86% of nonprofits believe the funding gap between government contracts and the cost of providing 
services will increase in the coming years and 91% had government contract budgets that fell below the 
full operating costs required to provide contracted services, forcing 79% of those surveyed to cut 
administrative costs and 56% to undercut staff salaries. 
 
Long-Term Return on Investment 
Investing in nonprofits that provide social services delivers a strong return on investment—not 
just for those directly benefiting, but for society as a whole. Research on mental health, housing, 
food accessibility, and public health consistently shows that these programs yield significant 
economic gains by improving overall well-being, productivity, and stability. In many cases, the 
returns exceed 5:1.4,5,6,7 
 
These significant benefits present a clear and valuable opportunity to strengthen our society. 
However, failing to address these needs—or worse, cutting funding for existing services—would 
not only erase the progress we’ve made but also lead to far greater costs for our state in the long 
run. 
 
By providing financial security to nonprofits in our state, the legislature can ensure hungry families 
have access to nutritious food, survivors of intimate partner violence are afforded legal protection, 
homeless families are able to obtain stable shelter, low-income kūpuna receive quality medical 
care, and the public health of our communities is preserved for generations to come. Taking a 
proactive approach to societal challenges ensures that we are building a foundation for lasting 
success, both for our people and our communities, now and into the future. 
 
Mahalo, 
 
Nate Hix 
Director of Policy and Advocacy 
7Masters R, Anwar E, Collins B, et al. Return on investment of public health interventions: a systematic review 
J Epidemiol Community Health 2017; https://jech.bmj.com/content/71/8/827  
6 “True Cost of Food: School Meals Case Study”. Rockefeller Foundation. 
https://www.rockefellerfoundation.org/reports/true-cost-of-food-school-meals-case-study/  
5 Jacob V, Chattopadhyay SK, Attipoe-Dorcoo S, Peng Y, Hahn RA, Finnie R, Cobb J, Cuellar AE, Emmons KM, Remington 
PL. Permanent Supportive Housing With Housing First: Findings From a Community Guide Systematic Economic 
Review. Am J Prev Med. 2022 Mar. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8863642/  
4Stelmach R, Kocher EL, Kataria I, Jackson-Morris AM, Saxena S, Nugent R. The global return on investment from 
preventing and treating adolescent mental disorders and suicide: a modelling study. BMJ Glob Health. 2022 Jun 
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9240828/  
707 Richards Street, Suite 300 • Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96813 • hiphi.org 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
March 26, 2025 
 
 
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and members of the Finance Committee, 
 
My name is Ashley Raymond, Executive Director, and I am submitting testimony on behalf of the Donkey Mill Art 
Center in strong support of SB933 SD2, the “Grant Funding Act of 2025.” This bill is urgently needed to protect 
nonprofit organizations facing federal funding cuts that continue to threaten essential services and jobs statewide. 
 
Hawai‘i’s nonprofits provide critical community services—healthcare, housing, food security, legal aid, 
environmental protection, education, and cultural preservation—reaching hundreds of thousands of residents 
each year. With hundreds of millions of federal funds now at risk, nonprofits face program shutdowns, service 
cuts, and staff layoffs, destabilizing communities and increasing demand for state-funded emergency services.  
 
The Donkey Mill Art Center is a place of convergence for the exploration of arts and culture to inform, inspire, and 
strengthen individual and collective well-being, located in Holualoa, Hawai‘i, on the slopes of Hualalai near 
Kailua-Kona. We provide hands-on classes, exhibitions, and cultural events on-site in our historic building and in 
local public schools for over 6,000 people annually. Our community art center is a staple resource in the Kona 
community for community connection and healing through the arts. It is critical we preserve resources like ours 
during such turbulent times. 
 
We support SB933 SD2 and urge the committee to adopt an amendment to expand eligibility, so that all 
nonprofit organizations facing substantial cuts to their programs and staff can apply for these critical emergency 
grants. Expanding eligibility beyond health, human services, and legal services to include other sectors such as 
education, arts, culture, and environment, ensures that nonprofits of varying sizes and missions—many of which 
rely heavily on federal funding—are not left behind during this fiscal crisis. 
 
Mahalo for your support of Hawai‘i’s nonprofits and for championing strong partnerships between government and 
nonprofits. This bill is a critical step toward safeguarding vital services, jobs, and community stability during this 
uncertain and challenging time. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
 
 
With aloha, 
 
Ashley Raymond 
Executive Director 
Donkey Mill Art Center, Holualoa, HI 
donkeymillartcenter.org 
78-6670 Mamalahoa Highway, Holualoa, Hawai’i 96725 • Telephone: (808) 322-3362 • Email: info@donkeymillartcenter.org • Website: www.donkeymillartcenter.org 
 

 
3599 Waiʻalae Ave., Ste. 25 • Honolulu, HI 96816 •Phone (808) 732-5402 •Fax (808) 732 5432 •hihumanities.org 
March 26, 2025 
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and members of the Finance Committee, 
My name is Aiko Yamashiro, and I am submitting testimony on behalf of Hawaiʻi Council for the 
Humanities in strong support of SB933 SD2, the “Grant Funding Act of 2025.” This bill is urgently 
needed to protect nonprofit organizations facing federal funding cuts that continue to threaten essential 
services and jobs statewide. 
Significant federal cuts would necessitate pausing or eliminating our grantmaking, loss of jobs in 
our small 8-person organization, and severe reduction in services to the public, including to 
teachers and students. Federal funding cuts would impact not just our organization but libraries, 
museums, cultural centers, etc.—our many community partners in this work and their broad 
constituencies. Hawai‘i’s economy will suffer as our jobs disappear and social service gaps grow. 
Hawaiʻi Council for the Humanities was established over fifty years ago as the state nonprofit affiliate of 
The National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH) and still receives 90% of our funding from this 
federal operating support grant. NEH is a federal agency created in 1965 through legislation naming the 
humanities and the arts as critical to the public good. As the NEH grounding phrase states, “Democracy 
demands wisdom.” Good governance and strong communities value critical thinking, reflection, and 
connection; histories, cultures, stories.  
The Hawaiʻi Council for the Humanities’ (HCH) mission is to enrich lives, broaden perspectives, and 
strengthen communities through public programs centered in the humanities. In 2024, HCH engaged 
33,531 people through 209 events and invested over $905,000 into our local economy through grants, 
programs, and partnerships. Some of our major activities include: 
●​ Awarding grants for preservation and public programs that create public access to quality 
educational resources, and engage important social issues through histories, stories, and deep 
discussion 
●​ Coordinating Hawaiʻi History Day, a program that supports the teaching of history and civics by 
providing curriculum, professional development and training, classroom materials, and 
interscholastic competition at no cost to the community. We serve grades 4-12, in partnership 
with 46 public, private, and charter schools on Kauaʻi, Maui, Molokaʻi, Oʻahu, and Hawaiʻi in 
2025 (from 39 schools in 2024).  
●​ Administering the Hawaiʻi State Poet Laureate program. In partnership with State Foundation on 
Culture and the Arts and the Hawaiʻi State Public Library System, we organize literary events 
across the state, empowering many voices to engage and reflect on who we are and where we 

are going, and providing connection and grounding amidst disorienting demographic and 
economic change. 
Rooted in our values of community access and interdependence, nearly all of our programs are free 
and accessible to the public and are designed as welcoming spaces for many perspectives to connect. 
We support SB933 SD2 and urge the committee to adopt an amendment to expand eligibility, so that all 
nonprofit organizations facing substantial cuts to their programs and staff can apply for these critical 
emergency grants. Expanding eligibility beyond health, human services, and legal services to include 
other sectors such as education, arts, culture, and environment, ensures that nonprofits of varying sizes 
and missions—many of which rely heavily on federal funding—are not left behind during this fiscal 
crisis.  
The diversity of our nonprofit sector is our strength, and we need increased cross-sector collaboration 
to support us in this crisis. As we navigate the tumult ahead, we hold on to and offer the core beliefs of 
the humanities. We value many voices and stories, empathy and critical thinking. We connect people to 
land, history, culture, and each other. The actions of the humanities build a more caring and responsible 
community. 
Mahalo for your support of Hawai‘i’s nonprofits and for championing strong partnerships between 
government and nonprofits. This bill is a critical step toward safeguarding vital services, jobs, and 
community stability during this uncertain and challenging time. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
Aiko Yamashiro 
Executive Director 
Hawaiʻi Council for the Humanities 
 
 

SB-933-SD-2 
Submitted on: 3/26/2025 11:11:56 AM 
Testimony for FIN on 3/27/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Louis Putzel 
Friends of Amy B. H. 
Greenwell Ethnobotanical 
Garden 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
To:       House Committee on Finance                                              March 26, 2025 
Re:      Testimony in Support of SB933 SD2, relating to the State Budget 
From:  Louis Putzel, Exec. Director, Friends of Amy B.H. Greenwell 
Ethnobotanical                  Garden 
             
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and Members of the Committee, 
Mahalo for the opportunity to provide testimony in strong support of SB933 SD2, relating to the 
State Budget, the Grant Funding Act of 2025. As stewards of Amy Greenwell Ethnobotanical 
Garden (AGEG), the nonprofit Friends of AGEG urges your support of this measure, which 
provides critical grant funding to organizations that contribute directly to Hawai‘i’s public 
health, safety, and general welfare—particularly in the wake of on-going and threatened 
reductions in federal support. 
The Friends of AGEG is a nonprofit organization dedicated to the preservation, restoration, and 
active use of traditional Hawaiian biocultural knowledge. Our mission is to protect and 
perpetuate the cultural and ecological resources of Kona and greater Hawai‘i Island through 
hands-on stewardship, conservation, education, and food security initiatives rooted in Native 
Hawaiian traditions and science. Our work serves not only the land but also the people—
especially our keiki and working families who rely on our programs as vital sources of 
environmental learning, cultural empowerment, and social support. 
Located in South Kona, the Garden is a living educational resource: a 15-acre landscape that 
grows and shares some of the largest and most comprehensive collections of traditional 
Hawaiian food staples such as kalo (taro), ‘uala (sweet potato), ‘ulu (breadfruit), and mai‘a 
(banana), all of which are crucial for building long-term, localized food security. In the face of 
increasing economic precarity and climate instability, the Garden’s stewardship of these crops 
represents more than heritage—it is a blueprint for future resilience. These food systems, shared 
throughout the community, actively address health and human service needs by reducing food 
insecurity and encouraging culturally appropriate nutrition and sustainable land use. 

In addition to our agricultural work, AGEG runs dynamic keiki education programs, including 
school partnerships and after-school enrichment offerings that alleviate pressure on working 
parents. Our programs provide a safe, enriching environment where children learn about mālama 
‘āina (caring for the land), connecting deeply to Hawaiian culture while gaining essential 
ecological literacy. For many families, particularly in underserved rural areas, such programs can 
serve as crucial bridges—offering both care and education, thereby supporting parents balancing 
their livelihoods and caregiving responsibilities. 
SB933 SD2 is timely and essential. The proposed one-time, nonrecurring grants offer a critical 
lifeline to nonprofit organizations like ours that operate on lean budgets and are increasingly 
burdened by the uncertainty of federal funding. AGEG is precisely the kind of organization 
envisioned in this bill: we deliver health- and community-centered services rooted in cultural 
practice, and we are at risk of losing momentum and impact due to rising operational costs and 
shrinking national support, even when we have a committed 5-year federal contract.  We are 
well-diversified in our funding base, but this federal retraction could critically impact our 
staffing and work. 
The Friends of Amy Greenwell Ethnobotanical Garden believes that investment in place-based, 
community-rooted nonprofits yields dividends across generations. Our programs nurture food 
sovereignty, environmental awareness, and intergenerational learning—cornerstones of a 
thriving and resilient Hawai‘i. We respectfully urge this committee to pass SB933 SD2 to ensure 
organizations that provide critical community services can continue to uplift our communities, 
steward our natural and cultural resources, and contribute to the health and wellbeing of 
Hawai‘i’s people. 
With deep aloha, mahalo nui loa for your time and consideration. 
 

March 26, 2025 
 
Hawai’i House Committee on Finance  
Representative Kyle T. Yamashita, Chair   
Representative Jenna Takenouchi, Vice Chair   
Representatives Tina Nakada Grandinetti, Daniel Holt, Ikaika Hussey, Sue L. Keohokapu-Lee Loy, 
Lisa Kitagawa, Matthias Kusch, Rachele F. Lamosao, Mike Lee, Tyson K. Miyake, Dee Morikawa, 
Shirley Ann Templo, David Alcos III, Julie Reyes Oda, and Gene Ward, Committee Members 
 
RE:  
SB 933 RELATING TO THE STATE BUDGET – SUPPORT 
 
Dear Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and Committee Members, 
 
I am submitting this letter in support of SB 933 on behalf of Easterseals Hawaii. Easterseals 
Hawaii served 2,025 Hawaii community members with intellectual and developmental 
disabilities (I/DD) in 2024. Our purpose is to create a more equitable world where people with 
I/DD can choose their own path.  
 
Community-based nonprofit organizations like Easterseals Hawaii are a lifeline for many 
individuals with I/DD in Hawaii. CBOs (community-based organizations) have been shown to 
reduce barriers to care, improve health outcomes, and to decrease costly inefficiencies by 
providing upstream solutions.1 Despite mounting evidence in support of, and rising demand for, 
our services, nonprofits struggle to stay afloat due to insufficient funding. In fact, 40% of 
nonprofit CBOs report that they may cease operations if funding challenges persist.2 These 
struggles are exacerbated by the current federal administration’s actions to decrease funding 
for social services. SB 933 would provide much-needed relief during this time by providing one-
time grants to organizations that provide critical health and human services. Please help 
organizations like Easterseals Hawaii continue to provide essential services for individuals with 
I/DD in Hawaii by voting in support of SB 933.    
 
Easterseals Hawaii supports SB 933 and respectfully requests your “aye” vote. Mahalo for the 
opportunity to submit this letter. 
 
 
 
 
Rachel Liebert Lewis 
Director, Public Policy and Advocacy 
Easterseals Hawaii 
PublicPolicyAndAdvocacy@eshawaii.org 
 
1 copehealthsolutions.com/cblog/role-of-cbos-to-reduce-health-care-access-barriers-and-enhance-clinical-outcomes/ 
2 https://hitruecost.com/resources/2022-survey-results/ 

 
House Committee on Finance 
March 27, 2025 at 2:00 PM 
Room 308 
 
Testimony in SUPPORT for SB933 SD2 
 
 
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and Members of the Committee: 
On behalf of the Hawai‘i Alliance of Nonprofit Organizations (HANO), we submit testimony and a 
sign-on letter from 76 community-based organizations in strong support of SB933, which 
proposes the “Grant Funding Act of 2025” to increase financial support for nonprofit organizations 
statewide. 
We greatly appreciate the Legislature’s ongoing support for Hawai‘i’s nonprofit sector and 
respectfully propose amendments to strengthen this bill by broadening eligibility, clarifying 
program guidelines, and ensuring the grant program meets the sector’s urgent and evolving 
needs. 
HANO is a statewide association of Hawai‘i nonprofits dedicated to strengthening and uniting the 
nonprofit sector to improve the quality of life in our islands. Since 2006, HANO has been a leading 
voice for nonprofits, advocating for policies and practices that enhance the sector’s sustainability, 
professionalism, and effectiveness. 
Hawai‘i’s nonprofit sector plays an indispensable role in delivering essential services that sustain our 
communities. Nonprofit organizations provide support through federally qualified health centers, 
early childhood education, domestic violence prevention, subsidized housing, homelessness 
services, and more. Many of these programs serve as lifelines for thousands of individuals and 
families across the state. 
The nonprofit sector is also a major contributor to Hawai‘i’s economy, making up nearly 12% of the 
state’s workforce and providing employment for thousands of local residents. According to 
USAspending.gov, as many as 250 nonprofits in Hawai‘i received federal grants and contracts in 
FY23, totaling an estimated $300 million to $400 million. The potential loss of millions of dollars in 
federal funding not only threatens essential services, but also puts these jobs at risk. Without 
adequate support, the nonprofit sector could see widespread layoffs, exacerbating economic 
instability and further straining Hawai‘i’s communities. 
Although the order to freeze funding is currently revoked, the Trump administration has been clear 
that it intends to implement the President’s broad and far-reaching executive orders, including 
restructuring federal government grants and contracts programming targeting diversity, equity, and 
hano-hawaii.org ● (808) 529-0466  
 

inclusion, immigration, LGBTQ+, environmental protection, and other subsectors.1 Without a 
state-level investment to bridge potential funding gaps, the safety net provided by Hawai‘i’s nonprofit 
sector could be compromised. 
Suggested Amendments to Strengthen SB933 (Part VI - Section 27): 
We propose the following amendments for the legislature’s consideration to improve clarity, flexibility, 
and accessibility of SB933, while ensuring accountability and alignment with existing state laws: 
●​
Expand eligibility to include nonprofits providing essential public services such as 
education, arts and culture, environment, societal benefit, and other community-based 
programs. This ensures charitable organizations of all sizes and missions that rely on federal 
funding are not preempted from applying for critical support during fiscal disruption.​
 
●​
Explore an expedited grant process or reopen the Grant-in-Aid (GIA) application for 
SB933 funds. With federal funding cuts threatening nonprofit services and our workforce, a 
streamlined grants and contracts process is critical to quickly delivering resources to 
organizations providing essential community services. Reopening the GIA application for 
emergency funding would also better reflect the current needs of the sector, while providing 
access to organizations who did not previously apply under Chapter 42F, HRS.​
 
●​
Define key terms such as “substantial” and “significantly decreased” to provide clearer 
guidelines for both nonprofits and administering agencies, for example:​
 
○​
“Substantial” means federal funding that, if reduced or lost, would materially impair 
an organization’s ability to maintain program services, operations, or staffing.​
 
○​
“Significantly decreased” refers to reductions that impact program operations, service 
delivery, or result in staffing reductions, layoffs, or furloughs.​
 
●​
Clarify eligibility related to funding risk by allowing organizations to qualify if they have 
received formal notice of federal funding suspension, termination, or reduction, or can 
present credible evidence that such risk exists within the next 12 months.​
 
●​
Include audit protections to ensure oversight without imposing audit costs on grantees, 
minimizing administrative burdens for smaller nonprofits.​
 
With the potential loss of millions in federal funding in 2025, the passage and full funding of SB933 is 
a timely and necessary measure. By increasing state grant funding for nonprofits, Hawai‘i can 
proactively sustain services that support public health, economic stability, and environmental and 
social well-being. An investment in nonprofits is an investment in Hawai‘i’s future, ensuring that the 
organizations serving our communities can continue their vital missions. Mahalo for your support for 
SB933 and for considering HANO’s proposed amendments to uplift our nonprofit sector. 
1 National Council of Nonprofits, Executive Orders Affecting Charitable Nonprofits. Updated March 26, 2025. See: 
https://www.councilofnonprofits.org/files/media/documents/2025/chart-executive-orders.pdf 
 

To: Hawai‘i State Legislators 
Date: February 25, 2025 
Re: Hawai‘i Nonprofits Sign-on in Support of SB933: “Grant Funding Act of 2025” 
Aloha Hawai‘i Senators and Representatives, 
We, the 76 undersigned Hawai‘i nonprofit organizations, strongly urge your support for SB933, the 
“Grant Funding Act of 2025,” which seeks to provide emergency funding to nonprofit organizations 
across the state. This critical investment comes at a time when the federal government is potentially 
freezing grants and contracts to Hawai‘i’s nonprofits, putting essential community services and local 
jobs at risk. Without immediate state intervention, Hawai‘i’s most vulnerable residents will experience 
service reductions and resource shortages at a time when they need them most. 
Supporting SB933 will: 
●​
Ensure uninterrupted access to vital health and human services, including federally qualified 
health centers, early childhood education, domestic violence support, subsidized housing, 
and homelessness prevention. 
●​
Stabilize the nonprofit sector amid federal funding cuts in traditionally marginalized and 
underserved communities. 
●​
Protect Hawai‘i’s nonprofit workforce, which comprises nearly 12% of the state’s total 
employment, safeguarding thousands of jobs.2 
●​
Strengthen Hawai‘i’s local economy by keeping essential services operational and 
preventing widespread layoffs in the nonprofit sector. 
With the potential loss of millions in federal funding in 2025, the passage and full funding of SB933 is 
a timely and necessary measure to bridge the financial gap and prevent disruptions in crucial 
community programs. By increasing state grant funding for nonprofits, Hawai‘i can proactively 
sustain services that support public health, economic stability, and environmental and social 
well-being. An investment in nonprofits is an investment in Hawai‘i’s future, ensuring that the 
organizations serving our communities can continue their vital missions.  
Mahalo for your commitment to support Hawai‘i’s nonprofit organizations during this critical time. 
 
Mahalo, 
`A`ALI`I Mentoring 
Kalamapi'i PLAY School 
Akaka Foundation for Tropical Forests 
Kanehunamoku Voyaging Academy 
Big Brothers Big Sisters Hawaii 
Kauai Search and Rescue 
CKO Consulting LLC 
Keiki Kupuna 
2  Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, The Economics Daily, Nonprofits accounted for 12.8 million jobs, 9.9 
percent of private-sector employment, in 2022 at 
https://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2024/nonprofits-accounted-for-12-8-million-jobs-9-9-percent-of-private-sector-employment-in-2022.htm 
(visited February 10, 2025). 
 

Creative Research Solutions 
Ko`olau Foundation 
Creative Research Solutions 
La Sorellanza 
Dawn Morais LLC 
Learning Endeavors 
East Hawaii Cultural Center 
Limahuli Garden & Preserve, NTBGG 
Family Programs Hawaii 
Maui Cancer Resources 
Friends of the Children's Justice Center of 
Oʻahu 
Maui Humane Society 
Goodwill Hawaii 
Maui Mediation Services 
Gregory House Programs 
Maui Pops Orchestra Inc 
Grow Good Hawaii 
Maunalua Fishpond Heritage Center 
Grow Some Good 
Moloka`i Land Trust 
Haku Baldwin Center 
National Tropical Botanical Garden 
HANO 
Papahānaumokuākea Marine Debris Project 
Hawai‘i Public Health Institute 
Partners in Development Foundation 
Hawaiʻi Children's Action Network 
Project Dāna 
Hawaii Alliance for Progressive Action (HAPA) 
Project Vision Hawai’i 
Hawaii Families As Allies 
Puʻuhonua Society 
Hawaii Good Food Alliance 
Puna Rising Ohana 
Hawaii Green Growth 
Responsive Caregivers of Hawaii 
Hawaii Health and Harm Reduction Center 
Sakyadhita Hawai'i 
Hawaii VA Foundation (DBA Our Kupuna) 
Samaritan Counseling Center Hawai'i 
Hawaii Youth Services Network 
Steadfast Housing Development Corporation 
Hawaiian Humane Society 
The Arc of Kona 
Hawaiian Mission Houses Historic Site and 
Archives 
The Caregiver Foundation 
Hawaiian Volcano Education and Resilience 
Institute 
The Kohala Center 
Ho`oulu Lāhui 
The Merwin Conservancy 
Hoʻohanu 
The Spirit Horse Ranch Inc 
Hoʻomāhua Foundation 
Trees for Honolulu’s Future 
Honolulu Zoological Society 
Volcano Arts Center 
HUGS for Hawaii's Seriously Ill Children and 
Their Families 
Wahine Freelance Alliance 
Kua'āina Ulu Auamo  
WAI: Wastewater Alternatives & Innovations 
ʻŌiwi TV 
Wisdom Circles Oceania 
IBOUNCE UP, INC. 
Women4Nonviolence 
IT Reuse Hawai'i 
YWCA Kauai 
Jewish Community Services of Hawaii 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
                     
      
    
  
 
 
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and Members of the House Finance 
Committee, 
 
The Hawaiʻi Farmers Union is a 501(c)(5) agricultural advocacy nonprofit representing 
a network of over 2,500 family farmers and their supporters across the Hawaiian 
Islands. HFU supports SB933. 
 
Local agriculture is being directly impacted by sweeping federal cuts, particularly 
within the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). Reductions to USDA programs 
have already affected support for local producers in Hawai‘i, especially smallholder 
farmers who rely on these funds for technical assistance, infrastructure, food safety, 
and cost-share programs. The impacts are also being felt by food banks and schools 
that previously depended on USDA funding to purchase fresh, locally grown food. 
 
These cuts threaten the viability of programs that: 
- Distribute local food to underserved communities, 
- Sustain regional food hubs and cooperatives, 
- Implement farm-to-school procurement and nutrition education, 
- Support Indigenous and regenerative agriculture. 
 
Without intervention, Hawai‘i risks losing gains made in building a resilient, 
community-based food system. Nonprofit partners that serve as 
intermediaries—aggregating, processing, and distributing locally grown food—are 
facing severe budget shortfalls due to lost federal funds. This not only undermines 
local food security but also weakens disaster response capacity and climate 
adaptation efforts. 
 
We recommend that SB933 SD2 be amended to explicitly include nonprofit 
organizations supporting food security, sustainable agriculture, and local food systems 
as eligible recipients of emergency grants. These organizations are essential to 
Hawai‘i’s future and deserve a seat at the table as the state responds to this funding 
crisis. 
 
 
Mahalo for the opportunity to testify. 
 
Hunter Heaivilin 
Advocacy Director 
Hawaiʻi Farmers Union 
 

 
 
TO:  
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
The Honorable Kyle T. Yamashita, Chair 
The Honorable Jenna Takenouchi, Vice Chair, and  
Members of the Committee  
  
FROM: Michelle Ka‘uhane, Senior Vice President & Chief Impact Officer  
  
DATE:  March 26, 2025 
  
RE:  
Testimony in Support for SB 933 SD2, Relating to the State Budget 
Date: Thursday, March 27, 2025 at 2:00 pm 
Place: Conference Room 308 and via videoconference 
 
The Hawaiʻi Community Foundation (HCF) supports Senate Bill 933 SD2 (SB 933 SD2) relating to 
the State Budget. The bill would appropriate funds for grants in fiscal year 2025-2026 to stabilize 
Hawai‘i’s nonprofit sector. The “Grant Funding Act of 2025” is crucial to maintaining access to 
community services and local jobs threatened by potential federal funding freezes.  
 
Our communities rely on nonprofit services funded by federal grants and contracts. Recently, the 
Urban Institute analyzed the potential scale of impact on the nation’s nonprofit sector. Urban 
Institute used 990 forms to determine the impact of federal funding and found two out of three 
nonprofits receive at least one government grant or contract. Hawai‘i’s nonprofits receive a total 
of $1.1 billion in government grants, and the share of at-risk nonprofits in our island home is 70%. 
Hawai‘i County has the largest share of at-risk nonprofits (73%). 
 
Hawai‘i Community Foundation collaborates with Hawai‘i’s nonprofit sector to ensure that our 
people and places thrive. We believe in our strong, capable nonprofit leadership that has nimbly 
responded to emergencies such as the Covid-19 pandemic, Maui fires, and needs that arise in 
specific communities. The nonprofit workforce comprises 12% of the state’s total employment 
representing thousands of local jobs. It is urgent to provide emergency and bridge funding to 
prevent disruptions in crucial community programs, and empower our nonprofit organizations 
faced with fiscal uncertainty to deliver excellent services in public health, human services, legal, 
housing, and social well-being. These services are vital to our communities and enable the 
government, business, and philanthropic sectors to deliver on our missions and our shared vision 
for a thriving Hawai‘i.  
 
Please advance SB 933 SD2. 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

Mōʻiliʻili Campus 
2700 Waiʻalae Avenue 
Honolulu, HI 96826 
Kosasa Family Campus at Hoʻopili 
91-1945 Fort Weaver Road 
ʻEwa Beach, HI 96706 
(808) 356-2200 | HawaiianHumane.org 
The Hawaiian Humane Society is dedicated to promoting the human-
animal bond and the humane treatment of all animals. 
 
 
 
Date: 
March 26, 2025 
 
To:  
Chair Rep. Kyle T. Yamashita 
 
Vice Chair Rep. Jenna Takenouchi 
 
and Members of the Committee on Finance 
 
Submitted By: Anna Neubauer, MPA, CAWA, President & CEO 
 
Hawaiian Humane Society, 808-356-2217  
 
RE: 
 Testimony in support of SB 933, SD2: Relating to the State Budget 
 
Thursday, March 27, 2025, 2 p.m., Room 308 & Videoconference 
 
 
On behalf of the Hawaiian Humane Society, thank you for considering our strong 
support for Senate Bill 933, which appropriates moneys for grants for fiscal year 2025-
2026 and subjects recipient organizations to certain requirements. 
Hawai‘i’s nonprofits provide critical community services, reaching hundreds of 
thousands of residents each year. With hundreds of millions of federal funds now at 
risk, nonprofits face program shutdowns, service cuts, and staff layoffs, destabilizing 
communities and increasing demand for state-funded emergency services. Our sector 
also represents nearly 12 percent of the state’s workforce. Hawai‘i’s economy will suffer 
if our jobs disappear and social service gaps grow. 
As the largest animal welfare nonprofit in the state of Hawaiʻi, the Hawaiian Humane 
Society provided services to more than 41,000 animals and 38,000 people in fiscal year 
2025 at our two campuses and out in the community. We are the only organization on 
Oʻahu that accepts any pet animal regardless of age, species, breed or condition. We 
strive to keep pets with the people who love them, but when our families suffer, pets 
suffer too, potentially increasing the need for services from our already full shelters. 
We support SB933, SD2, and urge the committee to pass this measure with an 
amendment to expand eligibility to all Hawaiʻi nonprofit organizations and safeguard vital 
services, jobs, and community stability during this challenging time.  
Mahalo for your consideration. 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

SB-933-SD-2 
Submitted on: 3/26/2025 4:15:22 PM 
Testimony for FIN on 3/27/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Angie Knight 
The Institute for Human 
Services 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
IHS, The Institute for Humans Services, Inc. stands in support of SB933 SD2, the “Grant 
Funding Act of 2025.” This bill is needed to protect nonprofit organizations facing federal 
funding cuts that continue to threaten essential services and jobs statewide. 
We support SB933 SD2 and ask the committee to amend the eligibility for funding so that more 
nonprofit organizations facing substantial cuts to their programs and staff can apply for these 
critical emergency grants. Expanding eligibility beyond health, human services, and legal 
services to include other sectors such as education, arts, culture, and environment, ensures that 
nonprofits of varying sizes and missions—many of which rely heavily on federal funding—are 
not left behind during this fiscal crisis. In order to continue providing these critical safety nets for 
households in our community, we need to work in continued collaboration with our service 
partners, something made a lot easier if said organizations do not close due to lack of funding or 
staff (due to funding).  
Mahalo for your support of Hawai‘i’s nonprofits and for championing strong partnerships 
between government and nonprofits. This bill is a critical step toward safeguarding vital services, 
jobs, and community stability during this uncertain and challenging time. 
 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

SB-933-SD-2 
Submitted on: 3/26/2025 6:42:37 PM 
Testimony for FIN on 3/27/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Peter Tuiolosega Silva 
Kumukahi Health + 
Wellness 
Support 
Remotely Via 
Zoom 
 
 
Comments:  
  
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and members of the Finance Committee, 
My name is Peter Silva, and I am submitting testimony on behalf of Kumukahi Health + 
Wellness on Hawai'i Island in strong support of SB933 SD2, the “Grant Funding Act of 
2025.” This bill is urgently needed to protect nonprofit organizations facing federal funding 
cuts that continue to threaten essential services and jobs statewide. 
Hawai‘i’s nonprofits provide critical community services—healthcare, housing, food 
security, legal aid, environmental protection, education, and cultural preservation—
reaching hundreds of thousands of residents each year. With hundreds of millions of 
federal funds now at risk, nonprofits face program shutdowns, service cuts, and staff 
layoffs, destabilizing communities and increasing demand for state-funded emergency 
services. Our sector also represents nearly 12% of the state’s workforce. Hawai‘i’s 
economy will suffer as our jobs disappear and social service gaps grow. 
Kumukahi Health + Wellness provides critical social and medical services to our island's 
most vulnerable populations, especially the LGBTQ+ and Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 
communities.  We face many cuts with our HRSA and CDC funding for DEI focused 
programs and serving those who exist in opposition to gender ideology of the current 
administration. We also have the statewide contract to provide medicaid assistance to hard 
to reach populations such as the houseless, those who are justice involved, migrants and 
those who's primary language is not English.    
We support SB933 SD2 and urge the committee to adopt an amendment to expand 
eligibility, so that all nonprofit organizations facing substantial cuts to their programs and 
staff can apply for these critical emergency grants. Expanding eligibility beyond health, 
human services, and legal services to include other sectors such as education, arts, culture, 
and environment, ensures that nonprofits of varying sizes and missions—many of which 
rely heavily on federal funding—are not left behind during this fiscal crisis. 
Mahalo for your support of Hawai‘i’s nonprofits and for championing strong partnerships 
between government and nonprofits. This bill is a critical step toward safeguarding vital 
services, jobs, and community stability during this uncertain and challenging time. 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
Mahalo, 
Peter T. Silva, CEO, Kumukahi Health + Wellness 
 

Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and members of the Finance Committee,
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF SB933 SD2
My name Michelle Cordero-Lee  and I am submitting testimony on behalf of Hawai’i
Meals on Wheels in strong support of SB933 SD2, the “Grant Funding Act of 2025.”
This bill is urgently needed to protect nonprofit organizations facing federal funding
cuts that continue to threaten essential services and jobs statewide.
Hawai‘i Meals on Wheels provides nutritious, medically tailored meals to homebound
kūpuna and individuals with disabilities across Oʻahu. In 2024, we delivered over
202,000 meals, with 56.65%—or 114,904 meals—funded by federal sources;
including SNAP, Medicaid, and the Older Americans Act. These funds support some of
our most vulnerable community members, allowing them to remain safe and
independent in their homes while receiving the nutrition they need.
The uncertainty surrounding federal executive orders and potential funding
reductions places our ability to serve at risk. Without support, we may be forced to
reduce services, impacting hundreds of kūpuna who rely on us for their daily meals.
Additionally, disruptions in funding could jeopardize jobs, affecting our dedicated
team members and kitchen partners who help prepare and deliver meals every day.
Beyond financial challenges, we have already begun experiencing the indirect effects
of federal policy changes. Three long-standing groups of volunteers—federal
employees who had been delivering meals weekly with their departments for over a
decade—were recently instructed to stop volunteering. These dedicated volunteers
were a crucial part of our service model, and their absence puts additional strain on
our operations. Their departure illustrates how federal actions, even beyond direct
funding cuts have real consequences for our ability to serve kūpuna.
SB933 would provide a vital safety net, allowing us to continue our mission without
interruption. Emergency grant-in-aid funding would help stabilize our programs,
sustain our workforce, and ensure that no kūpuna goes hungry due to circumstances
beyond our control.
Mahalo for your support of Hawai‘i’s nonprofits and for championing strong
partnerships between government and nonprofits. This bill is a critical step toward
safeguarding vital services, jobs, and community stability during this uncertain and
challenging time.
Mahalo,
 Michelle Cordero-Lee 
 CEO
 Hawai’i Meals on Wheels
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

Parents And 
^
 Children Together
B U ILDING THE RELATIONSHIPS 
THAT MATTER MOST
'tllJ
P a re n tsA n d C h ild re n T o g e th e r.o rg
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF SB 933 SD2 
RELATING TO THE STATE BUDGET
TO: 
Chair Yamashita, Vice-Chair Takenouchi, & Members,
House Committee on Finance
FROM: 
Trisha Kajimura, Vice-President of Strategy & External Affairs
DATE: 
March 27, 2025 at 2:00 PM
Parents And Children Together (PACT) supports SB 933 SD2, which provides one-time 
nonrecurring grants to organizations that provide critical services, in accordance with chapter 
42F.
Founded by residents of Kuhio Park Terrace in 1968, PACT is a statewide community-based 
organization providing a wide array of innovative and educational social services to families in 
need. Assisting more than 15,000 people across the state annually, we help identify, address, 
and successfully resolve challenges through our 20 programs. Among our services are early 
education programs, domestic violence prevention and intervention programs, child abuse 
prevention and intervention programs, childhood sexual abuse supportive group services, child 
and adolescent behavioral health programs, sex trafficking intervention, poverty prevention 
and community building programs.
PACT relies on federal funding through direct grants and also distributed through state 
contracts to provide the above services to the community. For example, PACT is a provider of 
Head Start and Early Head Start programs on Oahu and Hawaii Island, serving approximately 
800 children. PACT also has federal funds in its child welfare, domestic violence, youth drop-in, 
and family center programs. These programs have been the backbone of communities such as 
Kuhio Park Terrace, Halawa, Kaneohe, Maui County and Hawaiian Beaches in helping families 
achieve and maintain safety, economic stability and school engagement. As you may have 
heard through the True Cost Coalition, these programs are already underfunded. The loss of 
federal funding puts them at serious risk.
Thank you for introducing and hearing this bill. We appreciate the opportunity to testify. Please 
contact me at (808) 847-3285 or tkaiimura(5)pacthawaii.org if you have any questions.
ADDRESS 1300 Halona Street, Honolulu, Hawaii 96817 office (8 0 8 ) 847-3285 fax (8 0 8 ) 841-1485 emajl adm in@ pacthawaii.org

SB-933-SD-2 
Submitted on: 3/24/2025 2:30:59 PM 
Testimony for FIN on 3/27/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Aaron Ruddick 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I support SB933 SD2 
 

SB-933-SD-2 
Submitted on: 3/24/2025 3:54:30 PM 
Testimony for FIN on 3/27/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Molly Mamaril 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and members of the Finance Committee, 
My name is Molly Mamaril and I am writing in strong support of SB933 SD2, the “Grant 
Funding Act of 2025.” This bill is urgently needed to protect nonprofit organizations facing 
federal funding cuts that continue to threaten essential services and jobs statewide. 
Hawai‘i’s nonprofits provide critical community services—healthcare, housing, food security, 
legal aid, environmental protection, education, and cultural preservation—reaching hundreds of 
thousands of residents each year. With hundreds of millions of federal funds now at risk, 
nonprofits face program shutdowns, service cuts, and staff layoffs, destabilizing communities 
and increasing demand for state-funded emergency services. The nonprofit sector also represents 
nearly 12% of the state’s workforce. Hawai‘i’s economy will suffer as our jobs disappear and 
social service gaps grow. 
I support SB933 SD2 and urge the committee to adopt an amendment to expand eligibility, so 
that all nonprofit organizations facing substantial cuts to their programs and staff can apply for 
these critical emergency grants. Expanding eligibility beyond health, human services, and legal 
services to include other sectors such as education, arts, culture, and environment, ensures that 
nonprofits of varying sizes and missions—many of which rely heavily on federal funding—are 
not left behind during this fiscal crisis. 
Mahalo for your support of Hawai‘i’s nonprofits and for championing strong partnerships 
between government and nonprofits. This bill is a critical step toward safeguarding vital services, 
jobs, and community stability during this uncertain and challenging time. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
Mahalo, 
Molly Mamaril 
  
  
 

SB-933-SD-2 
Submitted on: 3/24/2025 4:46:33 PM 
Testimony for FIN on 3/27/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Franz Weber 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and members of the Finance Committee, 
My name is Franz Weber, and I am submitting testimony in strong support of SB933 SD2, the 
“Grant Funding Act of 2025.” This bill is urgently needed to protect nonprofit organizations 
facing federal funding cuts that continue to threaten essential services and jobs statewide. 
Hawai‘i’s nonprofits provide critical community services—healthcare, housing, food security, 
legal aid, environmental protection, education, and cultural preservation—reaching hundreds of 
thousands of residents each year. With hundreds of millions of federal funds now at risk, 
nonprofits face program shutdowns, service cuts, and staff layoffs, destabilizing communities 
and increasing demand for state-funded emergency services. Our sector also represents nearly 
12% of the state’s workforce. Hawai‘i’s economy will suffer as our jobs disappear and social 
service gaps grow. 
I am on boards of nine non-profits, several providing services to the underprivileged, homeless, 
neglected children, elderly, etc. 
I support SB933 SD2 and urge the committee to adopt an amendment to expand eligibility, so 
that all nonprofit organizations facing substantial cuts to their programs and staff can apply for 
these critical emergency grants. Expanding eligibility beyond health, human services, and legal 
services to include other sectors such as education, arts, culture, and environment, ensures that 
nonprofits of varying sizes and missions—many of which rely heavily on federal funding—are 
not left behind during this fiscal crisis. 
Mahalo for your support of Hawai‘i’s nonprofits and for championing strong partnerships 
between government and nonprofits. This bill is a critical step toward safeguarding vital services, 
jobs, and community stability during this uncertain and challenging time. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
Mahalo, 
Franz Weber 
 

SB-933-SD-2 
Submitted on: 3/24/2025 5:08:54 PM 
Testimony for FIN on 3/27/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Randy Gonce 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Strong Support 
 

SB-933-SD-2 
Submitted on: 3/24/2025 7:43:37 PM 
Testimony for FIN on 3/27/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Younghee Overly 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Thank you for hearing SB933 which would appropriate fund for one-time nonrecurring grants to 
organizations that provide critical services.  With hundreds of millions of federal funds now at 
risk, nonprofits providing critical healthcare, housing, food security, legal aid, environmental 
protection, education, and cultural preservation all face showdown or service cuts.  This would 
destablize our communities and our state.  Hawaii's economy will also suffer.  Please pass this 
measure.   
 

SB-933-SD-2 
Submitted on: 3/24/2025 8:45:32 PM 
Testimony for FIN on 3/27/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Deanna Espinas 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I support this measure.  Thank you! 
 

SB-933-SD-2 
Submitted on: 3/25/2025 7:25:14 AM 
Testimony for FIN on 3/27/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Benton Kealii Pang, 
Ph.D. 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and members of the Finance Committee, 
My name is Dr. Benton Pang, and I am submitting testimony on behalf of Kaʻala Farm Inc., 
where I serve as Board President, in strong support of SB933 SD2, the “Grant Funding Act of 
2025.” This bill is urgently needed to protect nonprofit organizations facing federal funding cuts 
that continue to threaten essential services and jobs statewide. 
Kaʻala Farm Inc. is a Native Hawaiian nonprofit dedicated to cultural and ecological restoration 
in the Waiʻanae Valley. For more than 40 years, we have served the community by reconnecting 
youth and families to the land, teaching traditional farming practices, and preserving sacred 
cultural sites. Our programs support food sovereignty, cultural education, environmental 
stewardship, and community resilience. 
Federal funds have supported our restoration efforts, education programs, and staff capacity. 
However, recent delays and threats to federal funding put our operations at risk—jeopardizing 
not only our ability to maintain vital cultural and environmental programs but also the 
livelihoods of our staff and the stability of our community partners and networks. 
We support SB933 SD2 and urge the committee to adopt an amendment to expand eligibility so 
that all nonprofit organizations facing substantial cuts to their programs and staff can apply for 
these critical emergency grants. Expanding eligibility beyond health, human services, and legal 
services to include other sectors such as education, arts, culture, and environment ensures that 
nonprofits of varying sizes and missions—many of which rely heavily on federal funding—are 
not left behind during this fiscal crisis. 
Mahalo for your support of Hawaiʻi’s nonprofits and for championing strong partnerships 
between government and community organizations. This bill is a critical step toward 
safeguarding vital services, jobs, and community stability during this uncertain and challenging 
time. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
Mahalo, 
Dr. Benton Pang 

Board President 
Kaʻala Farm Inc. 
 

SB-933-SD-2 
Submitted on: 3/25/2025 1:29:37 PM 
Testimony for FIN on 3/27/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Kathryn Lathrop 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha, 
I am a teaching artist with SFCA using the AITS grant program and a concerned mentor for 
youth and active community member offering art and Hawaiian cultural experiences on Kauai. 
As a mother of 5 and teacher/mentor for past 25 years, I have witnessed how imperative art and 
cultural education is to Kauai youth and young adults especially for their mental health and 
wellbeing, for creative problem solving and, critical thinking skills. With funding already being 
minor for culture and arts in general, and now being slashed with our current political climate, it 
is essential that this bill pass to keep these services alive and well, not only for job security for 
people like me but for the very clear benefits in the grand picture that youth gain from these 
programs. We can not all become robots. We need the arts and culture to keep our connections to 
this `āina, to support growth in individuals and communities, to maintain jobs and stability 
within families. We need this to prevent the cascading effects and essentially needs for more 
services that would result from not having the meaningful experiences that arts and culture 
provide. Mahalo for listening and respecting my viewpoint.  
 

SB-933-SD-2 
Submitted on: 3/25/2025 4:11:26 PM 
Testimony for FIN on 3/27/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Randall John Francisco 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I am in Strong Support esp., during this time of unwarranted and untimely Federal decisions that 
undermines the arts & humanities which are oftentimes deemed "Less Than" in comparison to 
other programs and budgets. A signicant reason Hawaii serves as a critical destination for 
visitors  are the unique culture and arts programs & activities which help to define and showcase 
our collective and multi-cultural humanity. Our Hawaiian host culture, the continuous evolution 
of our multi-cultural heritage are signicant reasons why Hawaii continues to lead our country and 
why people love to return to these Hawaiian islands. Please support financially in what you 
envision helps to showcase our pan-Asian & pan-Pacific cultures as we did a year ago in hosting 
the Pacific Festival. Mahalo Nui Loa for your consideration, time, Kuleana and, Aloha.  
 

SB-933-SD-2 
Submitted on: 3/25/2025 8:43:59 PM 
Testimony for FIN on 3/27/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Julie Kuo 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and members of the Finance Committee, 
My name is Julie Kuo, and I am submitting testimony in strong support of SB933 SD2, the 
“Grant Funding Act of 2025.” This bill is urgently needed to protect nonprofit organizations 
facing federal funding cuts that continue to threaten essential services and jobs statewide. 
Hawai‘i’s nonprofits provide critical community services—healthcare, housing, food security, 
legal aid, environmental protection, education, and cultural preservation—reaching hundreds of 
thousands of residents each year. With hundreds of millions of federal funds now at risk, 
nonprofits face program shutdowns, service cuts, and staff layoffs, destabilizing communities 
and increasing demand for state-funded emergency services. Hawai‘i’s economy will suffer as 
these jobs disappear and social service gaps grow. 
I support SB933 SD2 and urge the committee to adopt an amendment to expand eligibility, so 
that all nonprofit organizations facing substantial cuts to their programs and staff can apply for 
these critical emergency grants. Expanding eligibility beyond health, human services, and legal 
services to include other sectors such as education, arts, culture, and environment, ensures that 
nonprofits of varying sizes and missions—many of which rely heavily on federal funding—are 
not left behind during this fiscal crisis. 
Mahalo for your support of Hawai‘i’s nonprofits and for championing strong partnerships 
between government and nonprofits. This bill is a critical step toward safeguarding vital services, 
jobs, and community stability during this uncertain and challenging time. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
Mahalo, 
Julie Kuo 
 

SB-933-SD-2 
Submitted on: 3/26/2025 10:12:08 AM 
Testimony for FIN on 3/27/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Michele Mitsumori 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and members of the Finance Committee, 
My name is Michele Mitsumori, and I am submitting testimony in strong support of SB933 SD2, 
the "Grant Funding Act of 2025." 
In the past few months, we have seen the impact of destabilization from federal changes. As a 
caretaker for my elderly parents on Hawai'i Island, I rely on our vibrant and skilled network to 
help me navigate care, financial, physical, and other critical areas. This is especially vital as 
federal agencies such as the Social Security Administration are cut, and we face the potential risk 
of our personal data being shared. 
We need all the areas that are made possible by nonprofits, including education, arts, culture, and 
environment. As a caregiver, for example, I have been able to participate in programming such 
as a poetry workshop for caregivers, which helped me to understand and respond positively to 
stress and other demands, and in turn be able to take better care of my family over the longer 
term. 
In passing SB933 SD2, I urge you to adopt an amendment to expand eligibility so that ALL 
nonprofits facing substantial cuts can apply for these emergency grants. As we grow in our 
understanding of the systems fostering disinformation and division around us, we also vitally 
need the life-giving presence of beauty and awe in our lives and our communities, to remind us 
of who we are and of how much more we are together. 
Mahalo for this opportunity to testify in support of SB933 SD2, 
Michele Mitsumori 
Hilo, Hawai'i Island 
  
 

SB-933-SD-2 
Submitted on: 3/26/2025 8:28:18 PM 
Testimony for FIN on 3/27/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Briana Berdel 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Because of the current cuts of funding from the government it is very important that our 
legislature does its best to provide for these essential services, some of which are lifesaving 
and/or life changing for some of the people in our commuity.  
We must do our best to see that the lack of funding does not impact our ability to provide what is 
needed for so many people who are living here.  
 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

SB-933-SD-2 
Submitted on: 3/26/2025 11:44:54 PM 
Testimony for FIN on 3/27/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Evelyn Aczon Hao 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and members of the Finance Committee, 
I support SB 933 which would provide emergency grant-in-aid funding to Hawaiʻi’s nonprofits. 
This is a difficult time for nonprofits which face deep budget cuts from the federal government. 
Deserving people of Hawaiʻi still need the services of these nonprofits which include arts and 
cultural organizations. 
I am a retired educator (teacher and principal). The art community (performing artists, visual 
artists, and musical artists) have played an integral part in educating my students in the 
knowledge, skills, and temperament required in being creative, critical, and in making 
decisions—through art. These skills, needless to say, carry over to other subjects. 
This coordination between academic and artistic learning is crucial in developing well-educated 
persons who are part of our society. 
I urge you to please pass SB 933 and to adopt an amendment to expand eligibility to include 
other nonprofits active in education, arts, culture, and environment. 
Thank you, Evelyn Hao 
 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

SB-933-SD-2 
Submitted on: 3/27/2025 12:01:54 AM 
Testimony for FIN on 3/27/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Lasensua Osborne 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Music and dance are essential for students' development. Engaging in music and dance fosters 
creativ 
ity, self-expression, and emotional intelligence, while also helping children improve their focus, 
discipline, and collaboration skills. These art forms can boost academic performance by 
enhancing cognitive functions, such as memory and critical thinking. Additionally, Hawaii's 
unique cultural heritage can be preserved and celebrated through these programs, instilling pride 
and cultural understanding in young learners. Supporting arts education will create well-rounded, 
empathetic individuals, essential for both personal growth and the enrichment of Hawaii’s 
diverse community. 
4o 
 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 
