JOSH GREEN M.D. 
GOVERNOR 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
LT. GOVERNOR 
STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
DEPARTMENT OF TAXATION 
Ka ‘Oihana ‘Auhau 
P.O. BOX 259 
HONOLULU, HAWAI‘I 96809 
PHONE NO: (808) 587-1540 
FAX NO: (808) 587-1560 
GARY S. SUGANUMA 
DIRECTOR  
 
KRISTEN M.R. SAKAMOTO 
DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF 
GARY S. SUGANUMA, DIRECTOR OF TAXATION 
 
 
TESTIMONY ON THE FOLLOWING MEASURE: 
H.B. No. 476, Relating to Capital Gains Tax 
 
BEFORE THE: 
House Committee on Economic Development & Technology 
 
 
DATE: 
 
Wednesday, January 29, 2025 
TIME:  
 
10:00 a.m. 
LOCATION:  
State Capitol, Room 423 
 
 
Chair Ilagan, Vice-Chair Hussey, and Members of the Committee: 
 
The Department of Taxation (“Department”) offers the following comments 
regarding H.B. 476 for your consideration. 
 
H.B. 476, (1) amends section 235-51(f), Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS), by 
increasing the capital gains tax rate for individuals, estates, and trusts from 7.25 percent 
to 9 percent; and (2) amends section 235-71.5(2)(B), HRS, by increasing the alternative 
capital gains tax for corporations from 4 percent to 5 per cent. The bill has an effective 
date of July 1, 2025. 
 
The Department requests that the effective date of the bill be amended to apply to 
taxable years beginning after December 31, 2024 (or to taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 2025) to avoid the ambiguity and uncertainty that would arise from a 
change in tax rate in the middle of a taxable year. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments on this measure.  

 
sda 
 
 
 
Thirty-Third Legislature, State of Hawai’i 
Regular Session of 2025 
House Committee on Economic Development 
 
Testimony by IATSE 665 
January 29th, 2025 
 
HB 476 - Relating to Capital Gains Tax 
Aloha Chair Ilagan, Vice Chair Hussey, and members of the House Committee on Economic 
Development, 
My name is Tuia’ana Scanlan, president of IATSE 665 and IATSE International Trustee. Our 
union represents technicians and artisans in the Live Event, Tradeshow, and Film/TV sectors of 
Hawai’i’s Entertainment industry. Local 665 strongly supports HB 476 - Relating to Capital 
Gains Tax 
This bill is refreshing. Opponents of this bill will say that an increase in capital gains tax will 
disincentivize investments and entrepreneurship. Conversely, massive companies have extracted 
a staggering amount of wealth from our islands. We appreciate this bold move that directly 
benefits state coffers without exacting a heavy cost on the working families of Hawai’i. We thank 
the introducers and architects of this bill for their courage and foresight. Local 665 strongly 
supports HB 476. We urge your committee to pass this measure. Thank you for the opportunity 
to provide testimony. 
  
In Solidarity, 
  
  
Tuia’ana Scanlan (he/him) 
President, IATSE Local 665 
IATSE International Trustee 
 

L E G I S L A T I V E    T A X    B I L L    S E R V I C E 
TAX FOUNDATION OF HAWAII 
735 Bishop Street, Suite 417 
 
Honolulu, Hawaii 96813  Tel. 536-4587 
 
 
SUBJECT: NET INCOME, Increase Maximum Capital Gains Tax Rate 
BILL NUMBER: HB 476 
INTRODUCED BY: SAYAMA, HOLT, Kila, Matayoshi 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: Increases the maximum capital gains tax for individuals to 9%.  
Increases the maximum capital gains tax for corporations to 5%. 
SYNOPSIS:   Amends section 235-51(f), HRS, to increase the maximum capital gains rate for 
individuals from 7.25% to 9%. 
Amends section 235-71.5, HRS, to increase the maximum capital gains rate for corporations 
from 4% to 5%. 
EFFECTIVE DATE: July 1, 2025  
STAFF COMMENTS:   Under current law, capital gains are taxed as income.  A capital gain is a 
profit from the sale of a capital asset—such as a house, stock, bond, or jewelry— from the time 
that asset is acquired until the time it is sold. The price at which an asset is purchased is called 
the asset’s “basis,” and taxpayers pay tax on the difference between an asset’s basis and its sales 
price when they sell, or realize, that capital gain. 
In the federal system, for capital gains realized on assets held for less than one year (short-term 
capital gains), taxpayers pay taxes according to their ordinary individual income tax rate, ranging 
from 10 percent to 37 percent. For assets held longer than one year (long-term capital gains), 
taxpayers pay a reduced tax rate, ranging from 0 percent to 20 percent, depending upon a 
taxpayer’s income. Individuals with Modified Adjusted Gross Income surpassing $200,000 
($250,000 for married couples) pay an additional 3.8 percent tax on net investment income. 
Also, when a person dies and leaves property to an heir, the basis of that property is increased to 
its fair market value. This “step-up in basis” means that any capital gains that occurred during 
the decedent’s life go untaxed. When the heir sells that property, any capital gains taxation will 
be assessed based on the heir’s new basis. Step-up in basis reduces the tax burden on transferred 
property, as the total value of transferred property is already taxed by the estate tax. 
Presently, capital gains income is taxable at the federal level and in all 41 states that also tax 
wage income. The federal government offers a lower rate for long-term capital gains but taxes 
short-term gains at the ordinary rate. States tend to tax capital gains at the ordinary rate. 
This proposal is still a tax increase on individuals and corporations.  It would also be a tax 
increase on small businesses, since 75% or so of small businesses are organized as partnerships, 

Re:  HB 476 
Page 2 
LLCs taxed as sole proprietorships or partnerships, or S corporations; all of those business forms 
do not (yet) pay income tax at the entity level but its owners pay tax on their respective shares of 
the entity’s business, primarily at the individual level. 
A tax increase of any magnitude in Hawaii’s fragile economy will, no doubt, have a negative 
impact as costs soar due to higher taxes.  As costs and overhead increase, employers must find 
ways to stay in business by either increasing prices to their customers or cut back on costs.  This 
may take the form of reducing inventory, shortening business hours, reducing employee hours, or 
even laying off workers.  A tax increase of any magnitude would send many companies, 
especially smaller ones, out of business taking with them the jobs the community so desperately 
needs at this time. 
Digested:  1/26/2025 

 
  
Jan. 29, 2025, 10 a.m.   
Hawaii State Capitol 
Conference Room 423 and Videoconference 
 
To: House Committee on Economic Development and Technology  
      Rep. Greggor Ilagan, Chair  
      Rep. Ikaika Hussey, Vice-Chair 
  
From: Grassroot Institute of Hawaii 
            Ted Kefalas, Director of Strategic Campaigns  
 
RE: HB476 — RELATING TO CAPITAL GAINS TAX 
 
Aloha Chair Ilagan, Vice-Chair Hussey and other members of the Committee,  
 
The Grassroot Institute of Hawaii opposes HB476, which would increase the maximum capital gains tax rate for 
individuals from 7.25% to 9% and the capital gains tax rate for corporations from 4% to 5%.  
 
Hawaii is already ranked among the worst states in which to start a business,1 and we are concerned a higher 
capital gains tax could discourage business expansion and innovation.  
 
There are a number of sound fiscal reasons for taxing capital gains at a lower rate than income, if they are to 
be taxed at all.  
 
For one, it reflects the fact that capital gains are not indexed for inflation, thus the lower rate is intended to 
offset the fact that some portion of the gain represents inflation rather than real returns.2  
 
In addition, high capital gains taxes create a “lock in” effect in which investors delay the sale of investments in 
order to avoid tax repercussions. This reduces economic growth by discouraging diversification and the 
movement of capital within the state.3   
 
3 Jane Gravelle, “Capital Gains Taxes: An Overview of the Issues,” Congressional Research Service, May 24, 2022, p. 17.  
2 Stephen Entin, “Getting “Real” by Indexing Capital Gains for Inflation,” Tax Foundation, March 6, 2018. 
1 Adam McCann, “Best & Worst States to Start a Business (2025),” WalletHub, Jan. 20, 2025.  
1050 Bishop St. #508 | Honolulu, HI 96813 | 808-864-1776 | info@grassrootinstitute.org 
1 

 
That is why higher tax rates on capital gains could have the unintended effect of driving down investment and 
entrepreneurship in Hawaii.  
 
Curtis Dubay, chief economist at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, wrote in 2021: “The economic models and 
past history all reach the same conclusion: When you significantly increase taxes on capital gains you get 
significantly less capital investment.”4 
 
In other words, investors and entrepreneurs would be less likely to conduct business in Hawaii as an increase in 
the capital gains tax would contribute to Hawaii’s already poor business environment. 
 
A 2021 study by the Baker Institute noted that “two decades of relatively slow economic growth call for 
increased innovation and faster diffusion of new technology, but higher capital gains tax rates will reduce 
innovation and technology diffusion.”5  
 
Hawaii residents, of course, need more innovation, not less, to prosper.  
 
In addition, higher capital gains taxes can discourage savings. The national Tax Foundation wrote in 2019: 
“When multiple layers of tax apply to the same dollar, as is the case with capital gains, it distorts the choice 
between immediate consumption and saving, skewing it towards immediate consumption because the 
multiple layers reduce after-tax return to saving.”6 
 
In terms of generating tax revenues, a 2021 economic model from the University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton 
School found that a proposed hike in the federal capital gains tax rate would actually produce less revenue, 
since investors would be more likely to hold onto their investments so their heirs would inherit them at death, 
thus avoiding the increased capital gains tax.7 
 
In fact, Hawaii legislators should be skeptical of optimistic tax revenue projections achieved via a capital gains 
tax hike. A study from the Congressional Budget Office on how taxes affect the decision to realize gains 
concluded that such decisions are very responsive to changes in taxation.  
 
The study found a persistent elasticity of -0.79,8 which means that a 10% cut in capital gains taxes would 
increase realizations by 7.9%. Thus, a cut in the capital gains tax would have minimal or even a positive effect 
on tax revenues.  
 
8 Tim Dowd, et al., “New Evidence of the Tax Elasticity of Capital Gains,” Congressional Budget Office, June 2012, p.17. 
7 John Ricco, “Revenue Effects of President Biden’s Capital Gains Tax Increase,” Penn Wharton Budget Model, April 23, 2021.  
6 Erica York, “An Overview of Capital Gains Taxes,” Tax Foundation, April 26, 2019.  
5 John Diamond, “The Economic Effects of Proposed Changes to the Tax Treatment of Capital Gains,” Baker Institute Center for Public 
Finance, Oct. 27, 2021.  
4 Chris Dubay, “Raising the Capital Gains Tax: Who Does it Really Hurt?” U.S. Chamber of Commerce, May 13, 2021.  
1050 Bishop St. #508 | Honolulu, HI 96813 | 808-864-1776 | info@grassrootinstitute.org 
2 

 
In fact, in 2007 the IRS collected $122 billion at a 15% capital gains tax rate compared to only $26.7 billion in 
2007 dollars at the 40% rate in 1977, 9 This was a significant increase even after adjusting for inflation and 
other relevant factors.  
 
Conversely, an increase in the capital gains tax would net significantly less in tax revenues than what might be 
calculated from a static model.  
 
In short, Hawaii’s residents and businesses need a break from new taxes, tax increases, fees and surcharges. 
This is not the time to make Hawaii a more expensive place to live and do business.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.  
 
Ted Kefalas 
Director of Strategic Campaigns  
Grassroot Institute of Hawaii  
9 Daniel Block and William McBride, “Why Capital Gains are taxed at a Lower Rate,” Tax Foundation, June 27, 2012.  
1050 Bishop St. #508 | Honolulu, HI 96813 | 808-864-1776 | info@grassrootinstitute.org 
3 

 
 
Dear Chair Ilagan, Vice Chair Hussey, and Members of the Committee, 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on behalf of Hawaiʻi Appleseed in support of HB 476, 
which would raise the capital gains tax threshold to 9 percent and the alternative capital gains tax 
for corporations to 5 percent. 
 
Capital gains are the profits an individual earns by selling their assets, including stocks, bonds, 
art, and antiques. The maximum capital gains tax for the state is 7.25 percent, which is much 
lower than the top 11 percent tax rate on income from regular jobs. This loophole means that 
individuals in the upper income brackets receive preferential treatment—they pay a lower tax 
rate on their income from capital gains compared to low- to middle-income workers, who often 
cannot afford to buy a large amount of assets. 
 
For example, local taxpayers with incomes over $400,000 make around 33 percent of their 
taxable income through capital gains. In comparison, local taxpayers in the $40,000 to $50,000 
range earn just 0.7 percent of their taxable income through capital gains.1 
 
Hawaiʻi’s low capital gains tax gives the wealthy an unfair advantage over people with lower 
incomes. Just like the rest of us, the wealthy should pay their fair share of the taxes that support 
our state’s programs, infrastructure, and services. Raising the capital gains tax is an opportunity 
for Hawaiʻi to generate consistent revenue by targeting high-income taxpayers, who can easily 
afford to pay more in taxes. 
 
Raising the capital gains rate is a step in the right direction. This increase would mainly affect 
wealthy individuals who can afford to pay higher taxes. In fact, 80 percent of all the long-term 
capital gains in Hawaiʻi are earned by the wealthiest group of taxpayers—those who have 
incomes of at least $400,000.  
 
 
1 https://files.hawaii.gov/tax/stats/stats/indinc/2021indinc.pdf 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

 
 
 
This bill would boost funding for our schools, infrastructure, government assistance programs, 
and affordable housing that Hawaiʻi’s residents need to thrive.  
 
In the long term, we would also encourage legislators to look at taxing capital gains at the same 
rate as ordinary income. This would completely eliminate the capital gains loophole, while 
generating even more tax revenue for the state. 
 
Mahalo for your consideration. 

4 Fl-ct o
All s
Ilewnu STATp AFI-CIO
888 Mililani Street, Suite 50l . Honolulu, Hawaii 96813
Randy Perreira
Presirlent
Telephone: (8O8) 597- 1 44 1
Fax: (8O8) 593-2149
The Thirty-Second Legislatu re
House of Representatives
Committee on Economic Development & Technology
Testimony by
Hawaii State AFL-ClO
January 29,2025
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF H8476 - RELATING TO CAPITAL GAINS TAX
Chair llagan, Vice Chair Hussey, and members of the committee:
The Hawaii State AFL-CIO is a state federation of 74 affiliate labor organizations representing
over 68,000 union members across Hawaii in industries including healthcare, construction,
hospitality, entertainment, transportation, and government. The AFL-ClO serves its affiliates by
advocating for the rights of working families, promoting fair wages, ensuring safe working
conditions, and supporting policies that strengthen Hawaii's workforce.
We are in support of H8476, which increases the capital gains tax threshold to nine percent for
individuals and raises the alternative capital gains tax for corporations to five percent. Hawaii's
current capital gains tax structure disproportionately benefits wealthier individuals and
corporations, exacerbating income inequality across the state. This measure will help create a
more equitable tax system by ensuring that capital gains are taxed at a level closer to ordinary
income, which is how most working families' earnings are taxed.
Revenue generated from this adjustment could be used to support essential services, invest in
affordable housing, or improve infrastructure, benefiting residents and strengthening Hawaii's
economy. Working families rely on these services to maintain their quality of life, and a fairer
tax system ensures those who benefit the most contribute their fair share.
This measure reflects Hawaii's commitment to addressing economic inequality and fostering a
tax system that supports working families and the broader community.
:ffi:
su
itted,
I
ira
'ffi**flL
President
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

 
REALTOR® is a registered collective membership mark which may be used only by real estate professionals 
who are members of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS® and subscribe to its strict Code of Ethics. 
 
808-733-7060    
    1259 A‘ala Street, Suite 300 
        
 
                 Honolulu, HI 96817 
808-737-4977  
 
January 29, 2025 
 
The Honorable Greggor Ilagan, Chair 
House Committee on Economic Development & Technology 
State Capitol, Conference Room 423 & Videoconference 
 
RE: House Bill 476, Relating to Capital Gains Tax 
 
HEARING: Wednesday, January 29, 2024, at 10:00 a.m. 
 
 
Aloha Chair Ilagan, Vice Chair Hussey, and Members of Committee: 
 
My name is Lyndsey Garcia, Director of Advocacy, testifying on behalf of the 
Hawai‘i Association of REALTORS® (“HAR”), the voice of real estate in Hawaii and its 
over 10,000 members. HAR opposes House Bill 476, which increases the capital gains 
tax threshold to nine percent. Increases the alternative capital gains tax for 
corporations to five percent. 
 
A capital gain happens when one sells an investment for a profit, such as stocks, 
real estate, or businesses.  Hawaii has the 10th highest capital gains tax rate of all 50 
states and D.C.1  Additionally, 7 states have no capital gains tax and Washington 
exempts real estate from capital gains taxation. 
 
We believe attracting capital into the state is a necessary and critical component 
to solving our housing crisis for both renters and buyers. Unlike the federal capital gains 
tax rates, Hawaii does not make a distinction between short-term and long-term gains. 
As such, a capital gains tax increase may act to discourage new capital investment 
coming into the State.  
 
Additionally, HAR believes that Hawaii’s capital gains rate should be taxed at a 
lower rate than ordinary income to both factor in inflation and because a lower rate 
would factor in the high amount of risk it takes to start a business or invest in the stock 
market, where one could also lose a lot of money.  Furthermore, the capital gains tax 
has a disproportionate impact on our kupuna who may want to sell and downsize to a 
smaller home where they can age in place or rely on their investments to convert their 
assets to spendable income during their retirement, such as for medical expenses or to 
move in to a care home. 
 
Mahalo for the opportunity to provide testimony on this measure. 
 
 
1 Realized 1031. (n.d.). "Capital Gains Tax Rate."  https://www.realized1031.com/capital-gains-tax-rate 
 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

CONTACT: educationcaucusdph@gmail.com 
                            
 
HOUSE BILL 476, RELATING TO CAPITAL GAINS TAX  
 
JANUARY 29, 2025 · ECD HEARING 
POSITION: Support with amendments.  
RATIONALE: The Democratic Party of Hawai’i Education Caucus supports and suggests 
amendments for HB 476, which increases the capital gains tax threshold to nine percent and 
increases the alternative capital gains tax for corporations to five percent. 
Public education is the heartbeat of our democracy and our economy. Historically, however, our 
public school system has been dramatically underfunded, leading to reconsideration of whether 
or not to continue successful learning programs. Arts, Hawaiian cultural, career and technical, 
foreign language, and 21st Century elective programs have been slashed to maintain an 
unsustainable testing regime.  
Unfortunately, when our state’s education budget fails to keep pace with inflation, successful 
learning centers and categorical programming get placed on the chopping block, while the DOE's 
priorities shift from classroom support to programmatic savings. Put simply, when we fail to 
adequately fund our schools, the DOE must spend more time accounting for basic programs, 
crowding out concerns about the efficient allocation of funds for individual teacher and student 
needs, special education, career and technical education, wraparound services, and essential 
supports like student transportation, school meals, and mental health programs.  
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

2 
 
 
Increasing the capital gains tax would generate much-needed revenue into our state, which would 
help remedy our longstanding public education funding crisis. It is time for the wealthy to pay their 
fair share for crucial public services.  
That said, we urge your committee to amend this measure to tax capital gains at the same 
rate as ordinary income, which the House passed last year in HB 1660. Hawaiʻi is one of only 
nine states that taxes all capital gains—profits from the sale of stocks, bonds, investment real 
estate, art, and antiques—at a lower rate than ordinary income. This capital gains tax loophole 
privileges almost entirely high-income taxpayers, including non-residents who profit from investing 
in real estate in the islands. Moreover, taxing capital gains at the same rate as ordinary income 
will ensure that low- and middle-income tax payers do not pay a capital gains rate that exceeds 
their income tax bracket, but is rather in accordance with their annual income level.  
If Hawai‘i were to tax capital gains at the same rates as regular income, as most states do, we 
could bring in tens of millions of dollars in new revenue, 97 percent of which would be paid 

3 
by the top 5 percent of income earners in our state. The bottom 80 percent would pay nothing at 
all. That money could be used to fund vital state priorities, such as public education, environmental 
preservation, health care, mental health services, transportation infrastructure, and the 
establishment of tax credits for those in need.  
We cannot give up the quest for a fully funded school system. Our keiki’s and our community’s 
future depends on our resolve.  
Contact: educationcaucusdph@gmail.com 

HB-476 
Submitted on: 1/24/2025 4:25:10 AM 
Testimony for ECD on 1/29/2025 10:00:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Andrew Crossland 
Individual 
Oppose 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I STRONGLY OPPOSE raising taxes of any kind in Hawaii and I urge all members of the 
Committee to VOTE NO on this Bill. 
 

HB-476 
Submitted on: 1/26/2025 11:04:55 AM 
Testimony for ECD on 1/29/2025 10:00:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
lynne matusow 
Individual 
Oppose 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
First you giveth away, and now you take away. Last year taxpayers were gifted with tax 
reductions. Now you want to increase some taxes. Nothing like bait and switch. Shame on you 
and especially my representative, Daniel Holt, who is one of the introducers. Many of us buy and 
sell securities to earn a profit, which helps pay our daily living expenses. It is not only the rich 
who take advantage of capital gains. Please put a stop to this today by deferring this ill advised 
bill. 
 

HB-476 
Submitted on: 1/26/2025 10:27:40 PM 
Testimony for ECD on 1/29/2025 10:00:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Josh Fowler 
Individual 
Oppose 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Testimony on HB476 – Relating to Capital Gains Tax 
OPPOSE 
Aloha Chair and Members of the Committee, 
I am writing to strongly oppose HB476, which proposes increasing the capital gains tax rate in 
Hawaii to 9%. Hawaii already faces one of the highest tax burdens in the nation, and this bill will 
only exacerbate the challenges for residents struggling to make ends meet. 
Key Concerns: 
• 
Hawaii’s Tax Burden is Crushing Residents 
o Hawaii’s tax structure is already among the most punitive in the country. 
o For comparison:  
▪ 
Hawaii’s top income tax rate is 11%, compared to states like Texas, 
Florida, and Nevada, which have no income tax. 
▪ 
Washington only taxes capital gains on amounts over $250,000 at 7%. 
▪ 
Hawaii, however, taxes all capital gains, disproportionately impacting 
retirees, middle-class families, and those on fixed incomes who rely on 
their investments to get by. 
• 
Low Wages Paired with a Sky-High Cost of Living 
o Hawaii’s wages are comparable to the Midwest, but our cost of living rivals San 
Francisco or Los Angeles. 
o Raising capital gains taxes will only make it harder for residents to stay in 
Hawaii, especially as they already face expensive housing, food, and utilities. 
• 
Undermines Efforts to Stop Population Drain 
o Politicians, including the governor, frequently talk about stopping the population 
drain from Hawaii, but bills like HB476 do the exact opposite. 
o This is equivalent to punching yourself in the face and asking, “Why does my face 
hurt?” It’s counterproductive. 
o Increasing taxes will push locals out while making Hawaii a “playground for the 
rich” as wealthier, nonresident individuals continue to enjoy Hawaii without 
facing the same burdens as full-time residents. 
• 
Better Alternatives Exist 

o Look to Washington State as a model: Tax capital gains only above $250,000, 
protecting the vast majority of local residents while still raising revenue. 
o Consider tax incentives or breaks for full-time Hawaii residents to keep more 
local families here. 
This bill hurts the very people it claims to help. Instead of making Hawaii more livable, it drives 
local families further away. If we truly want to stop the population drain, we need to make it 
easier for residents to stay, not harder. 
I urge you to oppose HB476 and consider policies that genuinely prioritize the well-being of 
Hawaii’s people. 
Mahalo for your time and consideration, 
JD Fowler 
Honolulu, Hawaii 
 

HB-476 
Submitted on: 1/27/2025 8:44:21 AM 
Testimony for ECD on 1/29/2025 10:00:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Glen Kagamida 
Individual 
Oppose 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I strongly oppose this, and most any, tax increase.  Tax increases are inflationary and will only 
add to Hawaii's high cost of living. 
Taxes should be lowered to give people and businesses more purchasing power without being 
inflationary.  More economic activity leads to more tax revenue to the treasury. 
Mahalo, 
Glen Kagamida 
Hilo 
 

HB-476 
Submitted on: 1/27/2025 10:11:15 AM 
Testimony for ECD on 1/29/2025 10:00:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Cheryl Bellamy 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I support this bill.  Those who have more need to pay more taxes to support the Hawaii 
economy.  
 

HB-476 
Submitted on: 1/27/2025 1:19:50 PM 
Testimony for ECD on 1/29/2025 10:00:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Mary Begier 
Individual 
Oppose 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
With all due respect please consider the other existing taxes.   We are already taxed beyound the 
norm with the aggressive & regressive General Excise Tax and the 2nd highest state tax in the 
nation please stop picking on those that keep this state afloat!  
I know you need money for special projects but forever increasing taxes is not the path to take. 
Thank you for your consideration.  I do appreciate the challenging job you as elected officials 
make in representing our citizenry.  With Aloha,  Mary   
 

HB-476 
Submitted on: 1/28/2025 9:20:52 AM 
Testimony for ECD on 1/29/2025 10:00:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Hunter 
Individual 
Oppose 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
We struggle enough without more taxation. 
 
