TESTIMONY OF 
THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL 
KA ‘OIHANA O KA LOIO KUHINA 
THIRTY-THIRD LEGISLATURE, 2025 
 
 
ON THE FOLLOWING MEASURE: 
H.B. NO. 302, H.D. 1, RELATING TO CANNABIS. 
 
BEFORE THE: 
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER PROTECTION & COMMERCE 
 
DATE: 
Thursday, February 6, 2025 
TIME:  2:00 p.m. 
LOCATION: State Capitol, Room 329 
TESTIFIER(S): 
Anne E. Lopez, Attorney General, or  
Andrew Goff, Deputy Attorney General 
 
 
Chair Matayoshi and Members of the Committee:
The Department of the Attorney General (Department) offers the following 
comments. 
The purposes of the bill are to:  (1) remove the requirement that prospective 
medical cannabis patients meet in person with a physician or advanced practice 
registered nurse prior to being certified for the medical use of cannabis; and (2) allow 
applicants or the primary caregiver of applicants to purchase medical cannabis prior to 
approval by the Department of Health (DOH). 
The Department is concerned that allowing applicants for the medical use of 
cannabis to purchase cannabis before the DOH approves their application could expose 
ineligible individuals to liability.  Legal protections under Hawaii’s medical cannabis 
laws, as outlined in section 329-125, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS), apply only to 
medical cannabis patients who strictly comply with these laws, even if the individual 
mistakenly believed they were compliant with the law. 
Under the proposed bill, an applicant could purchase and possess up to two 
ounces of usable cannabis before the DOH has determined their eligibility for medical 
use.  If the application is denied, the applicant may already possess cannabis without 
legal authorization.  If that occurs, then the person's possession of the cannabis would 
be a violation of law, and the bill makes no provision for what happens to that illegally 
possessed cannabis.  We strongly recommend that the bill clarify what happens to the 

Testimony of the Department of the Attorney General 
Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 
Page 2 of 2 
 
applicant and the cannabis if the application is denied or otherwise recommend deleting 
the authorization for an applicant or primary caregiver to purchase cannabis prior to 
DOH approval found on page 4, lines 7-17. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments. 

 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAII 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 
P. O. Box 3378 
Honolulu, HI  96801-3378 
doh.testimony@doh.hawaii.gov 
 
 
 
 
Testimony COMMENTING on  HB302_HD1 
RELATING TO CANNABIS 
REP. SCOT Z. MATAYOSHI, CHAIR 
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER PROTECTION & COMMERCE 
 
Hearing Date:  February 06, 2025 
Room Number:  329 
 
Department Testimony:  The Department of Health (DOH) appreciates the intent of HB302 to 
1 
reduce barriers to accessing medical cannabis and recommends conforming amendments to do so 
2 
more safely.  
3 
 
4 
DOH notes that repealing the requirement for an in-person consultation with a healthcare 
5 
provider to obtain a certification for medical cannabis conflicts with section 453-1.3(c), Hawaii 
6 
Revised Statutes (HRS), which explicitly requires an in-person consultation and would need 
7 
revision.  DOH also notes that authorizing online consultations may open access to Hawaii 
8 
patients to mainland-based telehealth companies, some of which have been under scrutiny in 
9 
other states for questionable practices, and recommends amending chapter 329, HRS, the 
10 
Uniform Controlled Substances Act, to limit prescriptions, or in the case of medical cannabis 
11 
certifications, to those that “shall originate from within the State.” 
12 
Given that the current processing time for a complete application is 2–3 business days, DOH has 
13 
concern that authorizing purchases of medical cannabis prior to the approval of their application 
14 
will cause more potential harm than benefit.  Unintended consequences may include: 
15 
• Exposing a subset of patients to arrest for possession of a controlled substance without a 
16 
physical medical cannabis card;  
17 
• Leading to purchases over the legal limit if an approved patient without a card makes 
18 
purchases from different dispensaries; and  
19 
JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR OF HAWAIʻI 
KE KIAʻĀINA O KA MOKUʻĀINA ʻO HAWAIʻI 
KENNETH S. FINK, M.D., M.G.A., M.P.H. 
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH 
KA LUNA HOʻOKELE 

HB302_HD1 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
• Creating inaccuracies in inventory control systems at dispensaries since sales records are 
1 
based on the unique patient program registration number, which is provided on the card. 
2 
The Department respectfully requests that this provision be omitted. 
3 
 
4 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
5 

 
Hawaiʻi Cannabis Industry Association (HICIA) 
220 S King St #1600, Honolulu, HI 96813 
www.808hcia.com 
 
 
To:  
Representative Scot Matayoshi, Chair 
 
Representative Cory Chun, Vice-Chair 
Members of the House Consumer Protection and Commerce Committee  
 
Fr: 
TY Cheng, on behalf of Hawaiʻi Cannabis Industry Association.  
 
Re:  Testimony In Strong Support on House Bill (HB) 302 HD1 
RELATING TO CANNABIS 
Repeals the requirement that a provider-patient relationship be established in 
person. Allows applicants or primary caregivers to temporarily purchase medical 
cannabis after the submission of the applicant's certification form. 
 
Dear Chair Matayoshi, Vice-Chair Chun and Members of the Committee: 
The Hawaiʻi Cannabis Industry Association, represents a majority of the state’s licensed 
medical cannabis dispensaries. HICIA strongly supports HB302 HD1 which eases 
access issues for medical cannabis patients.   
When created in 2015, the medical cannabis dispensary laws were one of the most 
rigorous and strict systems amongst the dozens of states that allowed medical 
cannabis.  Since that time, the nation’s landscape and our state’s attitudes over 
cannabis have also changed dramatically such that many states allow for adult use, and 
our state has decriminalized non-medical use. There is a thriving illicit market that 
makes it easy and cheaper to access cannabis, and there is now increased availability 
of THC through hemp-derived products. Yet, Hawaii’s medical cannabis system has 
hardly changed.  
This appears to be one of the driving reasons why the number of registered patients has 
declined 15% over the past 3 years.  While HICIA continues to provide safe products 
that are tracked from seed to sale, 3rd party lab tested against impurities and pesticides, 
labeled with dosage and warnings – less patients are getting their cannabis from 
dispensaries due to price and ease. 
The purpose of this bill is to ease some of the archaic hurdles in the law that have been 
in place since 2015 that no longer seem necessary.  The laws on telehealth were 
already revised in 2021 for the parity of in-person and telehealth visits to create a bona 
fide physician-patient relationship, except for opiates and medical cannabis. That 
distinction for medical cannabis at this stage appears arbitrary, and the bill proposes to 
eliminate that difference.  

 
Hawaiʻi Cannabis Industry Association (HICIA) 
220 S King St #1600, Honolulu, HI 96813 
www.808hcia.com 
 
 
The Department of Health acknowledged in testimony to the House Health Committee 
that they never deny a qualifying physician’s patient approval submitted to the patient 
registry. Any delay is due to confirming the name and address of the patient and 
caregiver with the provided identification.  
The bill also allows a qualifying patient immediate access to enter a dispensary and 
purchase a limited amount of medical cannabis upon the Department of Health’s 
registry system recognizing the submission of a complete application.  The current 329 
program allows a patient to purchase up to 4 ounces of cannabis flower equivalent 
every 15 days. We support a patient’s right to access as little as up to 1 ounce of 
cannabis flower equivalent (which is only 25% of the allowable allotment) while a patient 
waits for their 329 card. It is cruel to require a patient to wait with their untreated 
symptoms after a physician qualifies a patient for medical cannabis use. We must 
protect and uphold the sanctity of the physician-patient relationship.  
Currently, a patient may wait anywhere from 3 days to a week to obtain their medical 
cannabis card or “329 card” which will then allow them to enter into a licensed 
dispensary.  This delay is often a significant barrier for patients who need their cannabis 
medication right away.  It not only is a possible deterrent to obtain a 329 card, but can 
also serve to push a patient towards obtaining product from the illicit market. Concerns 
about law enforcement are overblown as medical cannabis products are clearly labeled 
and packaged in child-proof containers, and patients are provided with a clear receipt 
from a dispensary displaying their name and remaining medicine allotment. The bill 
provides patients with a physical copy of the qualifying physician’s 329 card submission 
approval. This provides adequate legal protections for patients who wish to access 
much-needed medicine while they wait.  
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 

HB302 HD1-WRITTEN TESTIMONY-OTTO-06FEB25 
1 
 
 
Akamai Cannabis Consulting 
3615 Harding Ave, Suite 304 
Honolulu, HI  96816 
 
TESTIMONY ON HOUSE BILL 302 HD1 
RELATING TO CANNABIS 
 
Clifton Otto, MD 
 
House Committee on Consumer Protection & Commerce 
Representative Scot Z. Matayoshi, Chair 
Representative Cory M. Chun, Vice Chair 
 
Thursday, February 6, 2025 – 2:00 PM 
State Capitol, Room 329 & Videoconference 
 
Allowing patients to make a one-time fifty percent purchase of cannabis products from a 
dispensary simply with proof of registration application submission is problematic for the 
department and dispensaries.   
 
First the department will need to issue new registry rules under chapter 91, and new 
interim dispensary rules, to allow one-time purchases, and then change the tracking 
software to allow dispensaries to recognize an application number instead of a 
registration number to authorize a one-time purchase.  Then, once a registration 
number is issued, one-time purchase information will need to be reconciled with the 
patient’s new registration number for ongoing purchase tracking.  This would be a 
significant waste of department and dispensary resources. 
 
A better solution for providing immediate access to dispensaries after certification is to 
make the registration approval process automatic and instantaneous.  To this end, 
please consider removing the one-time purchase language from this bill and adding the 
following amendment: 
 
§329-123  Registration requirements; qualifying patients; primary caregivers.  
(e) The department shall use AI technology to make registration approval 
instantaneous.  In those instances where application errors are detected, the defective 
application shall be instantaneously returned to the certifying physician or APRN for 
immediate correction and resubmission. 
 
Please note that the Medical Cannabis Registry Program currently has about $11.6M in 
the registry special fund (at 4:38). 

 
 
 
 
First Hawaiian Center 
T 808-539-0400 
999 Bishop Street, Suite 1400 
mito@awlaw.com 
Honolulu, HI 96813 
 
 
 
 
DATE: 
February 5, 2025 
 
TO: 
Representative Scot Matayoshi 
Chair, Committee on Consumer Protection & Commerce 
Representative Cory Chun 
Vice Chair, Committee on Consumer Protection & Commerce 
 
FROM: 
Mihoko Ito 
 
RE: 
H.B. 302, HD1 – Relating to Cannabis 
Hearing Date: Thursday, February 6, 2025 at 2:00 p.m. 
Conference Room: 329 
 
Dear Chair Matayoshi, Vice Chair Chun, and members of the Committee: 
 
We submit this testimony on behalf of Cure Oahu in support of H.B. 302, HD1, 
Relating to Cannabis, which repeals the requirement that a provider-patient 
relationship be established in person and allows applicants or primary caregivers to 
temporarily purchase medical cannabis after the submission of the applicant's 
certification form. 
 
Cure Oahu supports this bill because it will ease the difficulties on patients and 
primary caregivers to navigate the registration process for the medical cannabis 
program.  The number of registered medical cannabis patients has been in decline 
since 2021.  There are various issues with the registration process - including the 
limited number of providers participating in the certification process, the costs 
incurred by patients as part of the certification process, and the proliferation of illicit 
market products.  
 
We believe that access to medical cannabis should be as streamlined as possible to 
ensure that patients can obtain their medical cannabis cards and access medical 
cannabis in a way that keeps patients and the public safe rather than bypassing the 
medical program altogether. Allowing full access via telehealth and providing the 
temporary purchase of small amounts of cannabis will help streamline access while 
balancing public safety concerns. 
 
For these reasons, we support this measure and ask that the Committee pass H.B. 
302, HD1.  Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of this 
measure.   

 
 
Lau Ola LLC, dba Big Island Grown Dispensaries 
HILO WAIMEA KONA 
 
 
To:  
Representative Scot Matayoshi, Chair 
Representative Cory Chun, Vice-Chair 
Members of the House Consumer Protection and Commerce Committee 
 
From: Jaclyn Moore, Pharm.D., CEO Big Island Grown Dispensaries   
 
Re:  
Testimony In Strong Support on House Bill (HB) 302 RELATING TO CANNABIS  
 
Repeals the requirement that a provider-patient relationship be established in person. Allows applicants 
or primary caregivers to temporarily purchase medical cannabis after the submission of the applicant's 
certification form.  
 
Dear Chair Matayoshi, Vice-Chair Chun and Members of the Committee:  
 
Big Island Grown, a state-licensed medical cannabis dispensary operating in Hawaii County, stands in 
strong support of HB 302. Over the past three years, the number of patients registered to receive medical 
cannabis has dropped by over 15%. One of the primary causes of this decline are regulatory barriers for 
patients to access cannabis through the legal dispensary system.   
 
Currently, patients must be certified as having one or more qualifying conditions via an in-person 
diagnosis from a small pool of registered certifying providers. Patients then wait days to receive a medical 
cannabis card to be eligible to even enter a state-licensed dispensary for their cannabis medication. For 
many patients who are terminally ill or in severe chronic pain, an in-person visit can be logistically 
challenging to schedule and make travel arrangements for.  Based on the severity of circumstance, any 
delay in a patient’s ability to access medical cannabis via the state-licensed dispensary system may simply 
drive them to alternate untested, unregulated sources. Legal access to medical cannabis via the 
dispensary system should be immediate following certification by a provider, especially for terminal 
patients.  
 
HB302 seeks to address these challenges and bolster patients’ access to cannabis medication by: 
 
• 
Allowing initial physician consultation to occur via telemedicine – a safe and common medical 
practice used increasingly since the COVID-19 pandemic. 
 
• 
Allowing patients to temporarily purchase a limited quantity of cannabis medication upon 
submission of a certification form and while awaiting delivery of the medical cannabis patient 
card.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in strong support. Without these important changes to the 
medical cannabis program, patient access to care will continue to decline and risk to public safety will 
increase as patients continue to turn to alternate untested, unregulated sources for their medical 
cannabis needs.   
 
Jaclyn L. Moore, Pharm.D., CEO Big Island Grown Dispensaries 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 
 	

 
 
 
 
To: 
 
 
Representative Scott Matayoshi, Chair 
Representative Cory Chun, Vice Chair 
  
 
 
Members of the Consumer Protection Committee 
  
Fr: 
 
 
Karlyn Laulusa, Chief Executive Officer, Noa Botanicals 
  
Re: 
 
 
Testimony with Comments of House Bill (HB) 302 
 
Hearing Date: 
Thursday, February 6th, 2025 – 2:00 p.m. 
              
Measure Title: 
RELATING TO CANNABIS. 
Report Title:  
Medical Cannabis; Access; Providers; Certiﬁcation 
Description: 
Repeals the requirement that a provider-patient relationship be 
established in person. Allows applicants or primary caregivers to 
temporarily purchase medical cannabis after the submission of the 
applicant's certiﬁcation form. 
 
Aloha Chair Matayoshi, Vice-Chair Chun, and members of the committee, 
  
My name is Karlyn Laulusa and I’m the Chief Executive Officer at Noa Botanicals, a medical 
licensee on the island of Oahu and I stand in strong support of HB302. 
  
When the medical cannabis dispensary program was created 10-years ago, it was designed 
to prevent abuse and included stringent restrictions. However, over the past ten-years 
much has changed, and the original rules and regulations have had the unintended 
consequence of driving those seeking medical cannabis to the illicit black market.  The 
program continues to struggle as enrollment in December of 2024 hit a low of 29,882 
participants (lowest participation since 2020).  The high barriers to access include- 
  
1. Limited physician participation statewide with only 237 physicians and APRN’s 
registered as of December 2024.  
2. The requirement of an in-person physician-patient visit to establish a bona-ﬁde 
relationship with a card issuer is burdensome. 
3. The uninsured and uncontrolled cost of a medical cannabis card can range from 
$100 to $300 omit the $38.50 state fee, depending on the provider and island. 
4. With limited physician participation, mandatory in-person visits, and high cost of 
entry, the program has become unaffordable and unattractive.  
 
 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 
 	

 
 
 
 
5. The next largest impacting factor has been the explosion of viable cannabis 
products that are being sold under the guise of hemp at businesses that allow  
immediate access as they do not require a medical card, offer online sales and in 
some cases delivery services. 
 
The dispensaries cannot compete with the sheer number of illegal operators that are 
selling cannabis to the general public.  With over forty (40) illegal dispensaries or resellers 
on Oahu, cannabis sales are already happening at retail stores at the airport, near schools 
and on every island.  In Waikiki there are six illegal operators between Beachwalk and 
Liliuokalani avenue.   
 
We need to ﬁnd ways to make it easier to join the medical program. 
 
The Department of Health (DOH) shared the below concerns, and I have added responses 
as an operator with ﬁve (5) years of experience in the how the processes and systems have 
been utilized to date – 
1. Concern about the potential for someone to enter a dispensary, make a purchase, 
and then have their application denied. 
o DOH rarely denies an application – any denials are based on technical errors 
or typos related to the address or names of patients/caregivers and are 
approved after corrections. 
o In the past ﬁve (5) years I have been unaware of the DOH ever reversing a 
physician or APRN’s certiﬁcation. 
2. Exposing a subset of patients to arrest for possession of a controlled substance 
without a physical medical cannabis card. 
o The Honolulu Police Department has made minimal arrests related to 
cannabis and the number continues to decline. 
3. Leading to purchases over the legal limit if an approved patient without a card 
makes purchases from different dispensaries; and 
o The software currently used by DOH’s registry could be purchased by the 
licensees to allow them to complete data entry as DOH does today. 
o DOH does little to no additional vetting of information received. 
4. Creating inaccuracies in inventory control systems at dispensaries since sales 
records are based on the unique patient program registration number, which is 
provided on the card. 
o Again, allowing the licensees access to the system at the time of the patient 
encounter would alleviate this issue. 
o As stated in previous testimony, the DOH is not available after the closure of 
business on weekdays and on weekends or holidays. 

 
 
 
 
This bill aims to improve access to safe, regulated medical cannabis for qualiﬁed patients 
in Hawaii by easing at least one of the many restrictions.  Failure to ease restrictions will 
only continue to drive medical patients to the illicit black market. 
  
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony and I am available for questions. 
Karlyn Laulusa 

HB-302-HD-1 
Submitted on: 2/4/2025 2:13:30 PM 
Testimony for CPC on 2/6/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Yvonne Alvarado  
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I Yvonne Alvarado Support Bill HB302 HD1 
 
