 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAII 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 
P. O. Box 3378 
Honolulu, HI  96801-3378 
doh.testimony@doh.hawaii.gov 
 
 
 
 
Testimony in SUPPORT of  HB302 HD2 
RELATING TO CANNABIS 
SENATOR JOY A. SANBUENAVENTURA, CHAIR 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 
 
SENATOR JARRETT KEOHOKALOLE, CHAIR 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE AND CONSUMER PROTECTION 
 
Hearing Date:  March 19, 2025  
Room Number:  229 
 
Department Position: The Department of Health (“Department”) supports this measure. 
1 
 
2 
Department Testimony:  The Department appreciates the intent of HB302 HD2 to reduce 
3 
barriers to medical cannabis access. The Department is grateful for the inclusion of its previously 
4 
requested amendment to limit medical cannabis certifications to those originating from within 
5 
the state, which serves to prevent mainland-based cannabis telehealth companies from operating 
6 
in Hawaii. This safeguard is especially important, as some of these companies have faced 
7 
scrutiny in other jurisdictions for questionable practices. 
8 
 
9 
Furthermore, the Department appreciates the removal of the provision that would have allowed 
10 
patients to purchase cannabis without first having their applications processed and receiving a 
11 
registration card from the Department. This provision posed significant risks, as it would expose 
12 
certain patients to arrest for possession of a controlled substance without a physical medical 
13 
cannabis card that law enforcement could verify. Additionally, it would lead to inaccuracies in 
14 
sales tracking and patient verification systems at state-licensed dispensaries due to purchases not 
15 
being tracked in the seed-to-sale tracking system. 
16 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
17 
JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR OF HAWAIʻI 
KE KIAʻĀINA O KA MOKUʻĀINA ʻO HAWAIʻI 
KENNETH S. FINK, M.D., M.G.A., M.P.H. 
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH 
KA LUNA HOʻOKELE 
__\____%aMWW"
\
IlIl_IIII_IIII
_I”I
7
\
_>OI
‘_
1%
F
Ma,”
____4mU
__
%wﬂ_
_
H 3
9
E
ENW“
_%_%_ wWIh%__
'
n
"_h“J ,
II
_
We
\__f
X\F$I'W@_W_
£“£_
%/Iv
gm?‘

HB302 HD2-WRITTEN TESTIMONY-OTTO-19MAR25 
1 
 
 
Akamai Cannabis Consulting 
3615 Harding Ave, Suite 304 
Honolulu, HI  96816 
 
TESTIMONY ON HOUSE BILL 302 HD2 
RELATING TO CANNABIS 
 
Clifton Otto, MD 
 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES  
Senator Joy A. San Buenaventura, Chair  
Senator Henry J.C. Aquino, Vice Chair  
 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE AND CONSUMER PROTECTION  
Senator Jarrett Keohokalole, Chair  
Senator Carol Fukunaga, Vice Chair  
 
Wednesday, March 19, 2025 - 9:30 AM 
Conference Room 229 & Videoconference, State Capitol  
 
This bill is very important for patients who have difficulty attending in-person certification 
evaluations, especially those patients on outer islands where access to certifying 
providers is limited. 
 
Since the intent of this bill is to improve patient access and program participation, your 
committees may want to consider the following amendment suggestions: 
 
1 - Let certifying providers decide qualifying conditions – already done in CA and ME. 
 
2 - Make registration approval instantaneous – verifying name and address and 
matching with patient identification can be done quickly and accurately using artificial 
intelligence to save department resources and expedite patient access to dispensaries. 
 
3 - Treat in-state and out-of-state patients the same – out-of-state registration is already 
unnecessary, and requiring a certification evaluation by a local provider would ensure all 
patients receive information to safely access medical cannabis in Hawaii. 
 
Potential language: 
 

HB302 HD2-WRITTEN TESTIMONY-OTTO-19MAR25 
2 
 
Let certifying providers decide qualifying conditions: 
 
§329-121  Definitions.  As used in this part: 
 "Debilitating medical condition" means any condition determined by the certifying 
physician or APRN to be appropriate for the medical use of cannabis. [ : 
     (1)  Cancer, glaucoma, lupus, epilepsy, multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, 
positive status for human immunodeficiency virus, acquired immune deficiency 
syndrome, or the treatment of these conditions; 
     (2)  A chronic or debilitating disease or medical condition or its treatment that 
produces one or more of the following: 
          (A)  Cachexia or wasting syndrome; 
          (B)  Severe pain; 
          (C)  Severe nausea; 
          (D)  Seizures, including those characteristic of epilepsy; 
          (E)  Severe and persistent muscle spasms, including those characteristic of 
multiple sclerosis or Crohn's disease; or 
          (F)  Post-traumatic stress disorder; or 
     (3)  Any other medical condition approved by the department of health pursuant to 
administrative rules in response to a request from a physician or advanced practice 
registered nurse or potentially qualifying patient. ] 
 
Make registration approval instantaneous: 
 
§329-123  Registration requirements; qualifying patients; primary caregivers.  
    (a)  Physicians or advanced practice registered nurses who issue written 
certifications shall provide, in each written certification, the name, address, patient 
identification number, and other identifying information of the qualifying patient.  The 
department of health shall require, in rules adopted pursuant to chapter 91, that all 
written certifications comply with a designated form completed by or on behalf of a 
qualifying patient.  The form shall require information from the applicant, primary 
caregiver, and physician or advanced practice registered nurse as specifically required 
or permitted by this chapter.  The form shall require the address of the location where 
the cannabis is grown and shall appear on the registry card issued by the department of 
health.  The certifying physician or advanced practice registered nurse shall be required 
to have a bona fide physician-patient relationship or bona fide advanced practice 
registered nurse-patient relationship, as applicable, with the qualifying patient.  All 
current active medical cannabis permits shall be honored through their expiration date. 
     (b)  Qualifying patients shall register with the department of health.  The registration 
shall be effective until the expiration of the certificate issued by the department of health 
and signed by the physician or advanced practice registered nurse.  Every qualifying 
patient shall provide sufficient identifying information to establish the personal identities 

HB302 HD2-WRITTEN TESTIMONY-OTTO-19MAR25 
3 
 
of the qualifying patient and the primary caregiver.  Qualifying patients shall report 
changes in information within ten working days.  Every qualifying patient shall have only 
one primary caregiver at any given time.  The department of health shall issue to the 
qualifying patient a registration certificate and may charge a fee for the certificate in an 
amount adopted by rules pursuant to chapter 91. 
     (c)  Primary caregivers shall register with the department of health.  Every primary 
caregiver shall be responsible for the care of only one qualifying patient at any given 
time, unless the primary caregiver is the parent, guardian, or person having legal 
custody of more than one minor qualifying patient, in which case the primary caregiver 
may be responsible for the care of more than one minor qualifying patient at any given 
time; provided that the primary caregiver is the parent, guardian, or person having legal 
custody of all of the primary caregiver's qualifying patients.  The department of health 
may permit registration of up to two primary caregivers for a minor qualifying patient; 
provided that both primary caregivers are the parent, guardian, or person having legal 
custody of the minor qualifying patient. 
     (d)  Upon inquiry by a law enforcement agency, which inquiry may be made twenty-
four hours a day, seven days a week, the department of health shall immediately verify 
whether the subject of the inquiry has registered with the department of health and may 
provide reasonable access to the registry information for official law enforcement 
purposes. 
     (e) The department shall use AI technology to make registration approval 
instantaneous.  In those instances where application errors are detected, the defective 
application shall be immediately returned to the certifying physician or APRN for 
correction and resubmission. 
     (f) [ (e) ] This section shall not apply to registration of a qualifying out-of-state patient 
or a caregiver of a qualifying out-of-state patient. 
 
Treat in-state and out-of-state patients the same: 
 
§329-121  Definitions.  As used in this part: 
[ "Adequate supply for a qualifying out-of-state patient" means an amount of cannabis 
individually possessed by a qualifying out-of-state patient or jointly possessed by a 
qualifying out-of-state patient who is under eighteen years old and the caregiver of the 
qualifying out-of-state patient that is not more than is reasonably necessary to ensure 
the uninterrupted availability of cannabis for the purpose of alleviating the symptoms or 
effects of the qualifying out-of-state patient's debilitating medical condition; provided that 
an "adequate supply for a qualifying out-of-state patient" shall not exceed four ounces of 
usable cannabis at any given time and shall not include live plants.  The four ounces of 
usable cannabis shall include any combination of usable cannabis and manufactured 
cannabis products, as provided in chapter 329D; provided that the usable cannabis in 
the manufactured products shall be calculated using information provided pursuant to 
section 329D-9(c). ] 

HB302 HD2-WRITTEN TESTIMONY-OTTO-19MAR25 
4 
 
[ "Caregiver of a qualifying out-of-state patient" means a parent, guardian, or person 
having legal custody of a qualifying out-of-state patient who is under the age of eighteen 
years. ] 
 
[ "Qualifying out-of-state patient" or "registered qualifying out-of-state patient" means a 
person who is registered for the medical use of cannabis in another state, a United 
States territory, or the District of Columbia. ] 
 
§329-122  Medical use of cannabis; conditions of use.  (a)  Notwithstanding any law 
to the contrary, the medical use of cannabis by a qualifying patient shall be permitted 
only if: 
     (1)  The qualifying patient has been diagnosed by a physician or advanced practice 
registered nurse as having a debilitating medical condition; 
     (2)  The qualifying patient's physician or advanced practice registered nurse has 
certified in writing that, in the physician's or advanced practice registered nurse's 
professional opinion, the potential benefits of the medical use of cannabis would likely 
outweigh the health risks for the particular qualifying patient; and 
     (3)  The amount of cannabis possessed by the qualifying patient does not exceed an 
adequate supply. 
     (b)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to a qualifying patient under the age of eighteen 
years, unless: 
     (1)  The qualifying patient's physician or advanced practice registered nurse has 
explained the potential risks and benefits of the medical use of cannabis to the 
qualifying patient and to a parent, guardian, or person having legal custody of the 
qualifying patient; and 
     (2)  A parent, guardian, or person having legal custody consents in writing to: 
          (A)  Allow the qualifying patient's medical use of cannabis; 
          (B)  Serve as the qualifying patient's primary caregiver; and 
          (C)  Control the acquisition of the cannabis, the dosage, and the frequency of the 
medical use of cannabis by the qualifying patient. 
     [ (c)  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the medical use of cannabis within the 
State by a qualifying out-of-state patient aged eighteen years or older legally authorized 
to use cannabis for medical purposes in another state, a United States territory, or the 
District of Columbia shall be permitted only if the qualifying out-of-state patient: 
     (1)  Provides to the department of health a valid medical use of cannabis card with 
an explicit expiration date that has not yet passed from the issuing jurisdiction and a 
valid photographic identification card or driver's license issued by the same jurisdiction; 
     (2)  Attests under penalty of law pursuant to section 710-1063 that the condition for 
which the qualifying out-of-state patient is legally authorized to use cannabis for medical 
purposes is a debilitating medical condition as defined in section 329-121; 

HB302 HD2-WRITTEN TESTIMONY-OTTO-19MAR25 
5 
 
     (3)  Provides consent for the department of health to obtain information from the 
qualifying out-of-state patient's certifying medical provider and from the entity that 
issued the medical cannabis card for the purpose of allowing the department of health 
to verify the information provided in the registration process; 
     (4)  Pays the required fee for out-of-state registration to use cannabis for medical 
purposes; 
     (5)  Registers with the department of health pursuant to section 329-123.5 to use 
cannabis for medical purposes; 
     (6)  Receives a medical cannabis registry card from the department of health; and 
     (7)  Abides by all laws relating to the medical use of cannabis, including not 
possessing an amount of cannabis that exceeds an adequate supply. 
     (d)  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the medical use of cannabis by a 
qualifying out-of-state patient under eighteen years of age shall only be permitted if: 
     (1)  The caregiver of the qualifying out-of-state patient provides the information 
required pursuant to subsection (c); and 
     (2)  The caregiver of the qualifying out-of-state patient consents in writing to: 
          (A)  Allow the qualifying out-of-state patient's medical use of cannabis; 
          (B)  Undertake the responsibility for managing the well-being of the qualifying out-
of-state patient who is under eighteen years of age with respect to the medical use of 
cannabis; and 
          (C)  Control the acquisition of the cannabis, the dosage, and the frequency of the 
medical use of cannabis by the qualifying out-of-state patient who is under eighteen 
years of age. ] 
     (c) [ (e) ]  The authorization for the medical use of cannabis in this section shall not 
apply to: 
     (1)  The medical use of cannabis that endangers the health or well-being of another 
person; 
     (2)  The medical use of cannabis: 
          (A)  In a school bus, public bus, or any moving vehicle; 
          (B)  In the workplace of one's employment; 
          (C)  On any school grounds; 
          (D)  At any public park, public beach, public recreation center, recreation or youth 
center; or 
          (E)  At any other place open to the public; provided that a qualifying patient, 
primary caregiver, [ qualifying out-of-state patient, caregiver of a qualifying out-of-state 
patient, ] or an owner or employee of a medical cannabis dispensary licensed under 
chapter 329D shall not be prohibited from transporting cannabis or any manufactured 
cannabis product, as that term is defined in section 329D-1, in any public place; 
provided further that the cannabis or manufactured cannabis product shall be 
transported in a sealed container, not be visible to the public, and shall not be removed 

HB302 HD2-WRITTEN TESTIMONY-OTTO-19MAR25 
6 
 
from its sealed container or consumed or used in any way while it is in the public place; 
and 
     (3)  The use of cannabis by a qualifying patient, parent, or primary caregiver [ , 
qualifying out-of-state patient, or caregiver of a qualifying out-of-state patient, ] for 
purposes other than medical use permitted by this part. 
     (d) [ (f) ]  For the purposes of this section, "transport" means the transportation of 
cannabis, usable cannabis, or any manufactured cannabis product between: 
     (1)  A qualifying patient and the qualifying patient's primary caregiver; 
     [ (2)  A qualifying out-of-state patient under eighteen years of age and the caregiver 
of a qualifying out-of-state patient; ] 
     (2) [ (3) ]  The production centers and the retail dispensing locations under a 
dispensary licensee's license; 
     (3) [ (4) ]  Dispensaries, to the extent authorized by section 329D-6(r); or 
     (4) [ (5) ]  A production center, retail dispensing location, qualifying patient, primary 
caregiver, qualifying out-of-state patient, or caregiver of a qualifying out-of-state patient 
and a certified laboratory for the purpose of laboratory testing; provided that a qualifying 
patient, primary caregiver, qualifying out-of-state patient, or caregiver of a qualifying out-
of-state patient may only transport up to one gram of cannabis per test to a certified 
laboratory for laboratory testing and may only transport the product if the qualifying 
patient, primary caregiver, qualifying out-of-state patient, or caregiver of a qualifying out-
of-state patient: 
          (A)  Secures an appointment for testing at a certified laboratory; 
          (B)  Obtains confirmation, which may be electronic, that includes the specific time 
and date of the appointment and a detailed description of the product and amount to be 
transported to the certified laboratory for the appointment; and 
          (C)  Has the confirmation, which may be electronic, available during transport. 
 
§329-123  Registration requirements; qualifying patients; primary caregivers.  
    (a)  Physicians or advanced practice registered nurses who issue written 
certifications shall provide, in each written certification, the name, address, patient 
identification number, and other identifying information of the qualifying patient.  The 
department of health shall require, in rules adopted pursuant to chapter 91, that all 
written certifications comply with a designated form completed by or on behalf of a 
qualifying patient.  The form shall require information from the applicant, primary 
caregiver, and physician or advanced practice registered nurse as specifically required 
or permitted by this chapter.  The form shall require the address of the location where 
the cannabis is grown and shall appear on the registry card issued by the department of 
health.  The certifying physician or advanced practice registered nurse shall be required 
to have a bona fide physician-patient relationship or bona fide advanced practice 
registered nurse-patient relationship, as applicable, with the qualifying patient.  All 
current active medical cannabis permits shall be honored through their expiration date. 

HB302 HD2-WRITTEN TESTIMONY-OTTO-19MAR25 
7 
 
     (b)  Qualifying patients shall register with the department of health.  The registration 
shall be effective until the expiration of the certificate issued by the department of health 
and signed by the physician or advanced practice registered nurse.  Every qualifying 
patient shall provide sufficient identifying information to establish the personal identities 
of the qualifying patient and the primary caregiver.  Qualifying patients shall report 
changes in information within ten working days.  Every qualifying patient shall have only 
one primary caregiver at any given time.  The department of health shall issue to the 
qualifying patient a registration certificate and may charge a fee for the certificate in an 
amount adopted by rules pursuant to chapter 91. 
     (c)  Primary caregivers shall register with the department of health.  Every primary 
caregiver shall be responsible for the care of only one qualifying patient at any given 
time, unless the primary caregiver is the parent, guardian, or person having legal 
custody of more than one minor qualifying patient, in which case the primary caregiver 
may be responsible for the care of more than one minor qualifying patient at any given 
time; provided that the primary caregiver is the parent, guardian, or person having legal 
custody of all of the primary caregiver's qualifying patients.  The department of health 
may permit registration of up to two primary caregivers for a minor qualifying patient; 
provided that both primary caregivers are the parent, guardian, or person having legal 
custody of the minor qualifying patient. 
     (d)  Upon inquiry by a law enforcement agency, which inquiry may be made twenty-
four hours a day, seven days a week, the department of health shall immediately verify 
whether the subject of the inquiry has registered with the department of health and may 
provide reasonable access to the registry information for official law enforcement 
purposes. 
     [ (e)  This section shall not apply to registration of a qualifying out-of-state patient or 
a caregiver of a qualifying out-of-state patient. ] 
 
[ §329-123.5  Registration requirements; qualifying out-of-state patient; caregiver 
of a qualifying out-of-state patient. ] 
[ (a)  Notwithstanding section 329-123, a qualifying out-of-state patient and a caregiver 
of a qualifying out-of-state patient shall register with the department of health as 
established by rule.  The registration shall be effective for no more than sixty days and 
may be renewed for no more than one additional sixty-day period that begins no later 
than twelve months after the preceding registration date; provided that the department 
shall not register any qualifying out-of-state patient for a period that exceeds the term of 
validity of the qualifying out-of-state patient's authority to use medical cannabis in the 
qualifying out-of-state patient's home jurisdiction. 
     (b)  A qualifying out-of-state patient aged eighteen or older, at a minimum, shall meet 
the following criteria for registration: 
     (1)  Provide a valid government-issued medical cannabis card issued to the 
qualifying out-of-state patient by another state, United States territory, or the District of 

HB302 HD2-WRITTEN TESTIMONY-OTTO-19MAR25 
8 
 
Columbia; provided that the medical cannabis card has an expiration date and has not 
expired; 
     (2)  Provide a valid photographic identification card or driver's license issued by the 
same jurisdiction that issued the medical cannabis card; and 
     (3)  Have a debilitating medical condition, as defined in section 329-121. 
     (c)  A qualifying out-of-state patient under eighteen years of age may be registered 
pursuant to this section only if the qualifying patient has a debilitating medical condition 
as defined in section 329-121 and the caregiver of the qualifying out-of-state patient, at 
a minimum, meets the requirements of paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (b) and 
consents in writing to: 
     (1)  Allow the qualifying out-of-state patient's medical use of cannabis; 
     (2)  Undertake the responsibility for managing the well-being of the qualifying out-of-
state patient who is under eighteen years of age, with respect to the medical use of 
cannabis; and 
     (3)  Control the acquisition of the cannabis, the dosage, and the frequency of the 
medical use of cannabis by the qualifying out-of-state patient who is under eighteen 
years of age. 
     (d)  In the case of any qualifying out-of-state patient who is under eighteen years of 
age, the department of health shall register the qualifying out-of-state patient and the 
caregiver of the qualifying out-of-state patient; provided that the department may 
register two caregivers for a qualifying out-of-state patient if each caregiver is the 
parent, guardian, or person having legal custody of the qualifying out-of-state patient 
who is under eighteen years of age. 
     (e)  Each qualifying out-of-state patient shall pay a fee in an amount established by 
rules adopted by the department pursuant to chapter 91 for each registration and 
renewal. 
     (f)  Upon inquiry by a law enforcement agency, the department of health shall 
immediately verify whether the subject of the inquiry has registered with the department 
of health and may provide reasonable access to the registry information for official law 
enforcement purposes.  An inquiry and verification under this subsection may be made 
twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week. 
     (g)  The department of health may temporarily suspend the registration of a 
qualifying out-of-state patient or a registered caregiver of a qualifying out-of-state 
patient for a period of up to thirty days if the department of health determines that the 
registration process for qualifying patients or primary caregivers is being adversely 
affected or the supply of cannabis for medical use available in licensed dispensaries is 
insufficient to serve qualifying patients and qualifying out-of-state patients.  A temporary 
suspension may be extended by thirty-day periods until the department of health 
determines that: 

HB302 HD2-WRITTEN TESTIMONY-OTTO-19MAR25 
9 
 
     (1)  Adequate capacity exists to register qualifying out-of-state patients and 
caregivers of qualifying out-of-state patients in addition to qualifying patients and 
primary caregivers; and 
     (2)  The licensed dispensaries are able to meet the demands of qualifying patients. ] 
 
§329-125  Protections afforded to a qualifying patient, or primary caregiver [ , 
qualifying out-of-state patient, or caregiver of a qualifying out-of-state patient ] 
.  (a)  A qualifying patient, or primary caregiver [ , qualifying out-of-state patient, or 
caregiver of a qualifying out-of-state patient ] may assert the medical use of cannabis 
authorized under this part as an affirmative defense to any prosecution involving 
marijuana under this part, part IV, or part IV of chapter 712; provided that the qualifying 
patient, or primary caregiver [ , qualifying out-of-state patient, or caregiver of a qualifying 
out-of-state patient ] strictly complied with the requirements of this part. 
     (b)  Any qualifying patient, or primary caregiver [ , qualifying out-of-state patient, or 
caregiver of a qualifying out-of-state patient ] not complying with the permitted scope of 
the medical use of cannabis shall not be afforded the protections against searches and 
seizures pertaining to the misapplication of the medical use of cannabis. 
     (c)  No person shall be subject to arrest or prosecution for simply being in the 
presence or vicinity of the medical use of cannabis as permitted under this part. 
 
§329-125.5  Medical cannabis patient and caregiver protections.  (a)  No school 
shall refuse to enroll or otherwise penalize, and no landlord shall refuse to lease 
property to or otherwise penalize, a person solely for the person's status as a qualifying 
patient or primary caregiver in the medical cannabis program under this part, unless 
failing to do so would cause the school or landlord to lose a monetary or licensing-
related benefit under federal law or regulation; provided that the qualifying patient or 
primary caregiver strictly complied with the requirements of this part; provided further 
that the qualifying patient or primary caregiver shall present a medical cannabis registry 
card or certificate and photo identification, to ensure that the qualifying patient or 
primary caregiver is validly registered with the department of health pursuant to section 
329-123. 
     (b)  For the purposes of medical care, including organ transplants, a registered 
qualifying patient's use of cannabis in compliance with this part shall be considered the 
equivalent of the use of any other medication under the direction of a physician and 
shall not constitute the use of an illicit substance or otherwise disqualify a registered 
qualifying patient from medical care. 
     (c)  No qualifying patient or primary caregiver under this part shall be denied custody 
of, visitation with, or parenting time with a minor, and there shall be no presumption of 
neglect or child endangerment, for conduct allowed under this part; provided that this 
subsection shall not apply if the qualifying patient's or primary caregiver's conduct 

HB302 HD2-WRITTEN TESTIMONY-OTTO-19MAR25 
10 
 
created a danger to the safety of the minor, as established by a preponderance of the 
evidence. 
     (d)  This section shall apply to qualifying patients, or primary caregivers [ , qualifying 
out-of-state patients, and caregivers of qualifying out-of-state patients ] who are validly 
registered with the department of health pursuant to this part and the administrative 
rules of the department of health. 
 
§329-127  Protection of cannabis and other seized property.  (a)  Cannabis, 
paraphernalia, or other property seized from a qualifying patient or primary caregiver in 
connection with a claimed medical use of cannabis under this part shall be returned 
immediately upon the determination by a court that the qualifying patient or primary 
caregiver is entitled to the protections of this part, as evidenced by a decision not to 
prosecute, dismissal of charges, or an acquittal; provided that law enforcement 
agencies seizing live plants as evidence shall not be responsible for the care and 
maintenance of such plants. 
     (b)  [ This section shall also apply to qualifying out-of-state patients and caregivers of 
qualifying out-of-state patients who are validly registered with the department of health 
pursuant to this part and the administrative rules of the department of health; provided 
that notwithstanding subsection (a) to the contrary, under ]  Under no circumstances 
shall cannabis, paraphernalia, or other property be returned to any location outside of 
the island from which it was seized. 
 
 
 

 
Hawaiʻi Cannabis Industry Association (HICIA) 
220 S King St #1600, Honolulu, HI 96813 
www.808hcia.com 
 
 
To:  
Senator Joy San Buenaventura, Chair 
 
Senator Jarrett Keohokalole, Chair 
Members of the Senate Joint Health and Human Services and Commerce and 
Consumer Protection Committee  
 
Fr: 
Blake Oshiro on behalf of the HICIA Assn.  
 
Re:  Testimony In Support with Requested Amendments on House Bill (HB) 
302, House Draft (HD) 2 
RELATING TO CANNABIS 
 Repeals the requirement that a provider-patient relationship be established in 
person.  sEffective 7/1/3000.  
 
Dear Chairs San Buenaventura and Keohokalole and Members of the Joint Committee: 
The Hawaiʻi Cannabis Industry Association, represents a majority of the state’s licensed 
medical cannabis dispensaries. HICIA supports HB302, HD1 which eases access 
issues for medical cannabis patients, but we request that the language which was 
removed in the House Consumer Protection Committee be re-inserted to help avoid 
patient access delays.   
When created in 2015, the medical cannabis dispensary laws were one of the most 
rigorous and strict systems amongst the dozens of states that allowed medical 
cannabis.  Since that time, the nation’s landscape and our state’s attitudes over 
cannabis have also changed dramatically such that many states allow for adult use, and 
our state has decriminalized non-medical use. There is a thriving illicit market that 
makes it easy and cheaper to access cannabis, and there is now increased availability 
of THC through hemp-derived products. Yet, Hawaii’s medical cannabis system has 
hardly changed.  
This appears to be one of the driving reasons why the number of registered patients has 
declined 15% over the past 3 years.  While HICIA continues to provide safe products 
that are tracked from seed to sale, 3rd party lab tested against impurities and pesticides, 
labeled with dosage and warnings – less patients are getting their cannabis from 
dispensaries due to price and ease. 
The purpose of this bill is to ease some of the archaic hurdles in the law that have been 
in place since 2015 that no longer seem necessary.  The laws on telehealth were 
already revised in 2021 for parity of in-person and telehealth visits to create a bona fide 
physician-patient relationship, except for opiates and medical cannabis. That distinction 

 
Hawaiʻi Cannabis Industry Association (HICIA) 
220 S King St #1600, Honolulu, HI 96813 
www.808hcia.com 
 
 
for medical cannabis at this stage appears arbitrary, and the bill proposes to eliminate 
that difference.  
The bill in its original and HD1 form, also had language to allows a qualifying patient 
immediate access to enter a dispensary and purchase a limited amount of medical 
cannabis upon the Department of Health’s registry system recognizing the submission 
of a complete application.  Currently, a patient may wait anywhere from 3 days to a 
week to obtain their medical cannabis card or “329 card” which will then allow them to 
enter into a licensed dispensary.  This delay is often a significant barrier for patients 
who need their cannabis medication right away.  It not only is a possible deterrent to 
obtain a 329 card, but can also serve to push a patient towards obtaining product from 
the illicit market.  
At the prior hearings, we heard concerns from the Department of Health and AG about 
this immediate access – that there was little to no wait time as it currently stands; that a 
person who obtained this amount could be found to guilty for as much as a class C 
felony.  We disagree.   
While it is true some patients upon submission to the DOH get a quick response and 
obtain their registration, we are also aware of instances that have take a few to several 
days.  Moreover, should a patient submit their documentation just prior to or on a 
weekend, they will most certainly need to wait a few days. 
We also disagree that a patient who had immediate access would ever likely be 
prosecuted.  They would have their certifying documentation from a health provider, 
they would have a labeled packaged product identifying that it came from a dispensary. 
But, if it would help achieve a more acceptable approach, HICIA would propose 
lessening the amount for the one-time amount from fifty percent (50%) of the dispensing 
limit to twenty-five percent (25%) 
Therefore, we respectfully request that the committee amend the bill by adding back in 
the following language.  
In Section 2 of the bill, the language in yellow highlight be added back in:  
 "(a)  Physicians or advanced practice registered nurses who 
issue written certifications shall provide, in each written 
certification, the name, address, patient identification number, 
and other identifying information of the qualifying 
patient.  The department of health shall require, in rules 
adopted pursuant to chapter 91, that all written certifications 

 
Hawaiʻi Cannabis Industry Association (HICIA) 
220 S King St #1600, Honolulu, HI 96813 
www.808hcia.com 
 
 
comply with a designated form completed by or on behalf of a 
qualifying patient.  The form shall require information from the 
applicant, primary caregiver, and physician or advanced practice 
registered nurse as specifically required or permitted by this 
chapter.  The form shall require the address of the location 
where the cannabis is grown and shall appear on the registry 
card issued by the department of health.  The certifying 
physician or advanced practice registered nurse shall be 
required to have a bona fide physician-patient relationship or 
bona fide advanced practice registered nurse-patient 
relationship, as applicable, with the qualifying patient[.]; 
provided that nothing under this part shall require that the 
bona fide physician-patient relationship or bona fide advanced 
practice registered nurse-patient relationship be established by 
conducting an initial in-person consultation.  After the 
submission of the applicant's form but before receipt of 
confirmed registration from the department of health, the 
applicant or primary caregiver may use the submission of the 
applicant's form as proof and documentation authorizing the 
applicant or primary caregiver to enter and make a one-time 
purchase of cannabis from a medical cannabis dispensary licensed 
under chapter 329D in an amount that is no more than twenty-five 
per cent of the dispensing limits under section 329D-13.  The 
department of health office of medical cannabis control and 
regulation shall facilitate the temporary authorization for 
applicants and primary caregivers.  All current active medical 
cannabis permits shall be honored through their expiration 
date." 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 

 
 
 
 
 
Committee: 
Health & Human Services and Commerce & Consumer 
Protection 
Hearing Date/Time:  
Wednesday, March 19, 2025 at 9:30am 
Place:  
 
 
Conference Room 415 & Via Videoconference  
Re: 
Testimony of the ACLU of Hawai‘i SUPPORTS H.B. 302 
H.D. 2 with Proposed Amendments 
 
Dear Chairs San Buenaventura and Keohokalole, Vice Chairs Aquino and Fukunaga, and 
Members of the Committees: 
 
The ACLU of Hawaiʻi supports H.B. 302 H.D. 2, which repeals the requirement that a 
provider-patient relationship be established in person. We are respectfully asking for 
amendments.  
 
During and since the COVID pandemic, telemedicine has become an “indispensable 
resource.” Unnecessarily requiring in-person visits can be burdensome and can expose 
vulnerable patients to pathogens. It can also prevent patients from consulting with the 
practitioner of their choice. Many physicians are not trained in medical cannabis and the 
most knowledgeable medical cannabis practitioners may be on a different island. 
 
This is particularly true in Hawai‘i, where there is a shortage of doctors and other medical 
practitioners on the neighbor islands. Telemedicine is a powerful and prudent tool which 
allows neighbor island residents to receive medical attention and guidance. Hawai‘i law 
already allows practioners to write prescriptions via telemedicine. There is no reason the 
same can’t be done for medical cannabis. 
 
Hawai’i law should not impose unnecessary costs and burdens on medical cannabis 
patients that are not imposed on other medications. It should allow telemedicine for 
medical cannabis. 
 
Proposed Amendment 
 
We believe prescribing physicians and advance practive registered nurses should be able 
to write medical cannabis prescriptions for “off-label”. Currently, approximately one-fifth of 
all prescriptions written in the U.S. are for “off-label” uses of medications for considtions 
other than what has been approved by the FDA. 
 
Many drugs approved by the FDA can potentially be far more harmful than medical 
cannabis. 
 
More states are allowing medical practioners to use their discretion to prescribe cananbis 
to their patients. Medical cannabis is often a safer alternative to other prescriptions. 
Currently, at least nine states allow medical cannabis prescriptions for any 
condition or any serious or debilitating condition. We believe Hawaii should join that 
HaWai‘i

American Civil Liberties Union of Hawai‘i 
P.O. Box 3410 
Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96801 
T: 808.522.5900 
F: 808.522.5909 
E: office@acluhawaii.org 
www.acluhawaii.org 
  
 
 
 
 
list of states, which includes California, Delaware, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, 
Oklahoma, New Hampshire, and Virginia. 
 
We request amending the bill to include language which closely mirrors Louisiana’s law, by 
amending HRS §329-121 by adding: 
 
(4) Any debilitating condition not otherwise specified in this 
section that a physician or advanced practice registered nurse, 
in his or her clinical opinion, considers debilitating to the 
individual patient and that the practitioner is qualified 
through their clinical education and training to treat. 
 
Alternatively, this language based on Nebraska’s law: 
 
(4) Any medical condition for which, in the physician's or 
advanced practice registered nurse's professional judgment, the 
potential benefits of cannabis outweigh the potential harms for 
the alleviation of a patient’s medical condition, its symptoms, 
or side effects of the condition’s treatment. 
 
Doctors, nurse practitioners, and their patients should be trusted to evaluate the benefits 
and risks of medical cannabis, as they can with other medications. 
 
While we support H.B. 302 H.D. 2, we urge you to adopt our requested amendments to 
improve and increase access to medical cannabis in Hawai‘i. 
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Carrie Ann Shirota  
Carrie Ann Shirota  
Policy Director  
ACLU of Hawaiʻi  
cshirota@acluhawaii.org 
 
The mission of the ACLU of Hawaiʻi is to protect the fundamental freedoms enshrined in the U.S. and State 
Constitutions.  The ACLU of Hawaiʻi fulfills this through legislative, litigation, and public education programs 
statewide.  The ACLU of Hawaiʻi is a non-partisan and private non-profit organization that provides its 
services at no cost to the public and does not accept government funds.  The ACLU of Hawaiʻi has been 
serving Hawaiʻi for over 50 years. 
 
 
 

 
 
Hawaiʻi Alliance for Cannabis Reform  
In Support of HB302 HD2  
 
 
 
 
 
March 19, 2025 
 
 
Aloha Chairs San Buenaventura and Keohokalole, Vice Chairs Aquino and Fukunaga, 
and honorable members of the Senate Health & Human Services and Commerce & 
Consumer Protection Committees: 
 
The Hawai‘i Alliance for Cannabis Reform (HACR) is dedicated to ending cannabis 
prohibition in Hawai’i and replacing it with a system of legalization and regulation, 
with a focus on reparative justice and inclusion. Hawai‘i residents support legalizing 
cannabis use for adults. Cannabis prohibition entails direct enforcement costs. 
Legalization makes it possible to regulate and control cannabis in order to promote 
public health and safety. 
 
We strongly support HB302 HD2, which would allow physicians and advanced practice 
registered nurses to certify patients for medical cannabis via telehealth. We also urge 
you to amend the bill to allow practitioners to certify patients to use medical cannabis 
for any medical condition, or any debilitating medical condition. Both reforms would 
bring the treatment of medical cannabis closer to prescription drugs, which often carry 
far greater risks.  
 
Supporting Allowing Medical Cannabis Certifications by Telehealth  
Hawaiʻi allows practitioners to issue most prescriptions via telehealth. (See H.R.S. 
§453-1.3, §457.27.) The same should be true of medical cannabis.  
 
During and since the COVID pandemic, telemedicine has become an “indispensable 
resource.”1 Unnecessarily requiring in-person visits can be burdensome and can expose 
vulnerable patients to pathogens. It can also prevent patients from consulting with the 
practitioner of their choice. Many physicians are not trained in medical cannabis and 
the most knowledgeable medical cannabis practitioners may be on a different island.  
 
Hawaiʻi law should not impose unnecessary costs and burdens on medical cannabis 
patients that are not imposed on other medications. It should allow telemedicine for 
medical cannabis.  
 
 
 
1 Omboni S, et al. The worldwide impact of telemedicine during COVID-19: current evidence and recommendations 
for the future. Connect Health. 2022 Jan 4;1:7-35. doi: 10.20517/ch.2021.03. PMID: 35233563; PMCID: 
PMC7612439. 
WA
,
\\> 1“,
.§\ L /0
at
",
,l’/ "
$5
' "Ore r \~~ ""3
/”/\*~\

Proposed Amendment: Allowing Medical Cannabis “Off-Label”  
Healthcare providers should be able to certify patients with any medical condition — or 
any debilitating medical condition — for the medical cannabis program. One-fifth of all 
prescriptions are “off-label,” or for a medical condition other than the one the FDA 
approved the medication for.  
 
Many prescriptions carry far more serious risks than medical cannabis. Opioid 
prescriptions cause more than 14,000 fatal overdose deaths per year,2 while cannabis 
has not been shown to have any lethal dose in humans.3 The sleeping pill Ambien now 
has a box warning reading,“Complex sleep behaviors including sleep-walking, sleep-
driving, and engaging in other activities while not fully awake may occur following use 
of AMBIEN. Some of these events may result in serious injuries, including death.”4 
Warnings also include severe anaphylactic/ anaphylactoid reactions, respiratory 
depression, and “worsening of depression or suicidal thinking.” Each year, well over 
100,000 Americans die from adverse drug events.5 
 
States are increasingly allowing physicians to use their discretion to certify patients to 
use cannabis, which is in many cases a safer alternative to prescriptions. At least 10 
other states allow patients to recommend medical cannabis for any condition or any 
serious or debilitating condition — California, Delaware, Louisiana, Maryland, 
Massachusetts, Missouri, Oklahoma, Nebraska, New Hampshire, and Virginia.  
  
We recommend adding the following language, which is based on Louisiana’s law, to the 
end of the definition of “debilitating medical condition” in H.R.S. §329-121: 
 
(4) Any debilitating condition not otherwise specified in this section that a 
physician or advanced practice registered nurse, in his or her clinical opinion, 
considers debilitating to the individual patient and that the practitioner is 
qualified through their clinical education and training to treat. 
 
Or, the following, based on Nebraska’s law: 
 
 
2 "Drug Overdose Deaths: Facts and Figures," National Institute on Drug Abuse. 
3 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine; Health and Medicine Division; Board on Population 
Health and Public Health Practice; Committee on the Health Effects of Marijuana: An Evidence Review and 
Research Agenda. The Health Effects of Cannabis and Cannabinoids: The Current State of Evidence and 
Recommendations for Research. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 2017 Jan 12. 9, National 
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine; The Health Effects of Cannabis and Cannabinoids: The Current 
State of Evidence and Recommendations for Research. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 2017 Jan 
12. 9. 
4 Ambien  zolpidem tartrate tablet, film coated  label: Revised: 2/2022 
https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/fda/fdaDrugXsl.cfm?setid=c36cadf4-65a4-4466-b409-c82020b42452 
5 Death From Prescription Drugs," RisCassi & Davis.  "Adverse drug events harm 2.7 million hospitalized patients in the U.S. 
annually, with over 106,000 deaths and that's just for hospitalized patients. Another 350,00 adverse drug events occur in U.S. 
nursing homes each year." 

(4) Any medical condition for which, in the physician's or advanced practice 
registered nurse's professional judgment, the potential benefits of cannabis 
outweigh the potential harms for the alleviation of a patient’s medical condition, 
its symptoms, or side effects of the condition’s treatment. 
 
Doctors, nurse practitioners, and their patients should be trusted to evaluate risks and 
benefits of medical cannabis, as they can with other medications.  
 
Concluding Thoughts  
 
Nearly 20% of Hawaiʻi adults admit using cannabis in the past year,6 but only 2.6% of 
residents are enrolled in the state’s medical cannabis program.7 Surveys indicate most 
cannabis consumers use it, at least in part, for medical purposes.8 HB302 HD2 would 
make it easier for them to consult with a knowledgeable provider, enroll in the state’s 
medical cannabis program, and purchase lab-tested medicine. 
 
We urge you to amend HB302 HD2 and pass it out of your committees. 
 
 
 
Mahalo for your time and public service, 
The Hawaiʻi Alliance for Cannabis Reform 
 
 
 
 
Member Organizations include: 
 
ACLU of Hawaiʻi  ⬦  Cultivation Sector Consulting LLC ⬦ 
Cannabis Society of Hawaiʻi ⬦   Council for Native Hawaiian Advancement ⬦   
Chamber of Sustainable Commerce  ⬦  Doctors for Drug Policy Reform  ⬦ 
Drug Policy Forum of Hawaiʻi   ⬦  Marijuana Policy Project 
Cannabis Society of Hawaiʻi ⬦ Chamber of Sustainable Commerce  ⬦  Doctors for Drug 
Policy Reform  ⬦ Drug Policy Forum of Hawaiʻi   ⬦  Marijuana Policy Project 
 
 
 
6 Interactive NSDUH State Estimates, "Marijuana Use in Past Year Among Adults Aged 18 or Older, by State: 2021-
2022," U.S. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Accessed March 17, 2025. 
7 State of Hawaii, Department of Health Medical Cannabis Registry Program, Program Statistics.("November 30, 
2024 – 30,035 valid Hawaii in-state patients"); U.S. Census Bureau, Quick Facts: Hawaii. July 1, 2024 (1.43 million 
residents, 1.14 million of whom are adults. 
8 "Cannabis Consumers in America 2023, Part 1: An Overview of Consumers Today," New Frontier Data, p. 12. 

 
 
Lau Ola LLC, dba Big Island Grown Dispensaries 
HILO WAIMEA KONA 
 
 
Testimony 
Committees on Health & Human Services and Commerce & Consumer Protection 
Hawaii State Senate 
Wednesday, March 19, 2025, 9:30 am 
HB302, HD2, RELATING TO MEDICAL CANNABIS 
 
To: 
Sen. San Buenaventura, Chair 
Sen. Keohokalole, Chair 
Members of the Committees  
From: Jaclyn Moore, Pharm.D., CEO Big Island Grown Dispensaries   
Re: 
In SUPPORT of HB302, HD2, Relating to Medical Cannabis 
Aloha Chairs San Buenaventura and Keohokalole:  
Big Island Grown Dispensaries is one of eight medical cannabis dispensary licensees in the 
State.  We operate a production facility and 3 retail locations on the Big Island of Hawaii.  In 
addition, our medical cannabis operation currently employs over 55 Big Island residents.   
 
Mahalo for the opportunity to provide testimony in SUPPORT of HB302.   
 
Cannabis sales in Hawaii are currently uncontrolled and dominated by illicit criminal sales that 
risks public health and safety. As a licensed medical dispensary, we have seen the first-hand 
effects of the unregulated illicit market has on our industry. Over the past three and a half years, 
the number of registered cannabis patients has declined by roughly 15%.  
 
Hawaii’s medical dispensary program is suffering from regulatory barriers that make operations 
difficult to sustain and facing increasing threats of competition - from criminal street sales to 
unregulated hemp products sold at retailers across the islands.  
 
This measure seeks to address one of the regulatory barriers that impacts patients access to 
medical cannabis by allowing physicians and their patients to utilize telemedicine for their initial 
consultation. However, we believe the measure can be strengthened further with the following 
amendments: 
 
- 
Allow Instant Sales. Patients currently must wait days to receive a card from the 
Department of Health that allows them to purchase cannabis after their physician 
consultation. No other medicine requires such delays. Moreover, this delay leads 
patients to the illicit market where untested cannabis is easier and faster to secure. In 
turn, this risks the health and safety of patients, not to mention the public. 
 
ISLIIND

 
 
Lau Ola LLC, dba Big Island Grown Dispensaries 
HILO WAIMEA KONA 
 
- 
Allow Waiting Room Sales. Currently, sales of non-medical cannabis products are 
prohibited at dispensaries. Allowing other products to be sold in waiting areas at 
dispensaries can help to offset the declining sales volumes licensees are facing. 
 
- 
Broader Qualifying Conditions. Patients eligible to receive medical cannabis must 
currently be diagnosed under a short list of qualifying conditions. Allowing physicians to 
determine whether a patient can benefit from cannabis rather than the DOH would help 
to ensure patients are receiving access to the care and medicine most appropriate for 
needs. 
 
- 
Wholesale Transport. Licensees are now allowed to sell cannabis products to other 
licensees through wholesale transactions. This process, however, can be cumbersome 
and expensive. We urge the committee to consider amending the wholesale regulations 
to make transportation of products easier. 
 
- 
Advertising and Marketing. Licensees are currently prohibited from advertising and 
marketing. This restriction has handcuffed the ability of licensees to grow their market 
and educate consumers. We urge the committee to consider amending this provision to 
allow licensees greater flexibility. 
 
- 
Stronger Enforcement. Given the proliferation of illicit sales and potential risks of 
untested and tainted cannabis products, it is imperative that strong and effective 
enforcement occur to safeguard public health and safety. 
 
 
We respectfully urge the Committees to pass HB302 and consider incorporating our proposed 
amendments. 
 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
 
 
Jaclyn L. Moore, Pharm.D. 
CEO  
Big Island Grown Dispensaries 
ISLIIND

HB-302-HD-2 
Submitted on: 3/18/2025 6:43:43 PM 
Testimony for HHS on 3/19/2025 9:30:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Nikos Leverenz 
Testifying for Drug Policy 
Forum of Hawaii 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Chair San Buenaventura, Vice Chair Aquino, & HHS Committee: 
Chair Keohokalole, Vice Chair Fukunaga, & CPN Committee: 
On behalf of Drug Policy Forum of Hawaii (DPFH), I am writing in support of HB 302, HD 2, 
which would repeal the requirement that a provider-patient relationship be established in person 
for the purpose of certification as a medical cannabis patient. 
DPFH also supports the amendment proposed by the Hawaii Alliance for Cannabis Reform 
(HACR) to authorize providers greater latitude in patient certification by adding the following 
language to H.R.S. §329-121: 
(4) Any debilitating condition not otherwise specified in this section that a physician or advanced 
practice registered nurse, in his or her clinical opinion, considers debilitating to the individual 
patient and that the practitioner is qualified through their clinical education and training to 
treat. 
As HACR notes in its testimony, at least ten other states provide such latitude. 
This is but one of many reforms to Hawaii’s medical cannabis regulations that would better meet 
the needs of current patients and other residents who could benefit from its use. For example, 
medical cannabis patients should be provided with statutory employment protections. 
Mahalo for the opportunity to provide testimony. 
 
 	

 
 
March 17, 2025 
 
Re: Supporting HB 302 and Requesting an Amendment 
 
Aloha Chairs San Buenaventura and Keohokalole, Vice Chairs Aquino and Fukunaga, and 
distinguished members of the Senate Health and Human Services and Consumer Protection 
Committees: 
 
My name is Karen O’Keefe. I am the director of state policies for the nonprofit Marijuana 
Policy Project (MPP), the largest cannabis policy reform organization in the nation. We urge 
you to report HB 302 favorably and to adopt the amendment recommended by the Hawai’i 
Alliance for Cannabis Reform to allow physicians to certify patients for cannabis for any 
medical condition, as they can do with prescription medications.  
 
Allowing Initial Consultations Via Telehealth  
Medical cannabis patients should be allowed to have all consultations, including their initial 
one, via telehealth, as is allowed for most prescription medications. 
 
Medical schools generally do not educate doctors about medical cannabis, and many 
physicians do not feel knowledgeable about it.1 As a result, many patients who were 
diagnosed by one practitioner go to a medical cannabis specialist for their certification. 
There is no need to require a patient to visit with their medical cannabis practitioner 
in-person. This requirement drives up costs and burdens on patients and steers them to 
whichever practitioner is on their island — even if it is not the practitioner who the patient 
would like to advise them about medical cannabis. 
 
Allowing Medical Cannabis for Any Medical Condition   
MPP also supports the amendment proposed by the Hawaii Alliance for Cannabis Reform to 
allow doctors to certify cannabis for any condition — or any debilitating condition. Doctors 
and nurse practitioners can prescribe far more dangerous medications off-label, and they 
should be able to do so for cannabis as well. 
 
There are over 10,000 rare diseases,2 and many more that have not even been identified. It 
is impossible to have research for any medication on all of the conditions any one drug may 
assist. Research is far more limited for cannabis because the federal government stacked 
2 https://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/ 
1 Evanoff AB, Quan T, Dufault C, Awad M, Bierut LJ. Physicians-in-training are not prepared to prescribe 
medical marijuana. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2017 Nov 1;180:151-155. doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2017.08.010. 
Epub 2017 Sep 4. PMID: 28892720; PMCID: PMC5648595. 
 
 
Marijuana Policy Project
P.O. Box 21824 - Washington, DC 20009
202-462-5747 - www.mpp.org

 
the deck against research into cannabis’ benefits due to unique federal barriers and the lack 
of funding.3  
 
The FDA and HHS have recommended rescheduling cannabis to Schedule III because it has 
currently accepted medical use and a lower potential for abuse than Schedule II drugs. It 
remains to be seen if the Trump Administration’s DEA will follow through on this scientific 
recommendation. But in the meantime, Hawai’i should expand its own law to allow 
practitioners to certify patients “off-label.”  
 
There will always be a subpopulation for whom any individual treatment does not work. 
Some are allergic to some medications. Hawai’i should allow cannabis to be another tool in 
the toolbox. 
 
Concluding Thoughts  
Nearly 60% of Hawai’i voters believe cannabis should be legal for all adults. While the 
legislature has failed to make that a reality, at a minimum it should improve the medical 
cannabis law to: 
1.​ Allow physicians and nurse practitioners to certify patients via telehealth, and  
2.​ Allow doctors and nurse practitioners to certify patients for any condition, as they 
can do with prescriptions.  
 
We would also support any amendment to allow immediate access to medical cannabis. 
Patients don’t have to wait days or weeks to fill a prescription, and they should not be 
forced to wait to access cannabis after being certified.  
 
Mahalo for your time and consideration. Please don’t hesitate to reach out if I can answer 
any questions. 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Karen O’Keefe  
Director of State Policies  
202-905-2012 
kokeefe@mpp.org 
3 See: "Federal Obstruction of Medical Cannabis Research," MPP  https://www.mpp.org/issues/me 
dical-marijuana/federal-obstruction-of-medical-marijuana-research/ 
/§€M@%€/2*

 
 
 
 
First Hawaiian Center 
T 808-539-0400 
999 Bishop Street, Suite 1400 
mito@awlaw.com 
Honolulu, HI 96813 
 
 
 
 
DATE: 
March 18, 2025 
 
TO: 
Senator Joy San Buenaventura 
Chair, Committee on Health and Human Services 
Senator Jarrett Keohokalole 
Chair, Committee on Commerce and Consumer Protection 
 
FROM: 
Mihoko Ito 
 
RE: 
H.B. 302, HD2 – Relating to Cannabis 
Hearing Date: Wednesday, March 19, 2025 at 9:30 a.m. 
Conference Room: 229 
 
Dear Chair San Buenaventura, Chair Keohokalole, and Members of the Joint 
Committees: 
 
We submit this testimony on behalf of Cure Oahu in support of H.B. 302, HD2, 
Relating to Cannabis, which repeals the requirement that a provider-patient 
relationship be established in person. 
 
Cure Oahu supports this bill because it will ease the difficulties on patients and 
primary caregivers to navigate the registration process for the medical cannabis 
program.  The number of registered medical cannabis patients has been in decline 
since 2021.  There are various issues with the registration process - including the 
limited number of providers participating in the certification process, the costs 
incurred by patients as part of the certification process, and the proliferation of illicit 
market products.  
 
We believe that access to medical cannabis should be as streamlined as possible to 
ensure that patients can obtain their medical cannabis cards and access medical 
cannabis in a way that keeps patients and the public safe rather than bypassing the 
medical program altogether. Allowing full access via telehealth and providing the 
temporary purchase of small amounts of cannabis will help streamline access while 
balancing public safety concerns. 
 
For these reasons, we support this measure and ask that the Committee pass H.B. 
302, HD2.  Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of this 
measure.   
I SanHi
GOVERNMENT STRATEGIES
A umrsn LIABILITY LAW PARTNERSHIP

HB-302-HD-2 
Submitted on: 3/15/2025 7:26:39 PM 
Testimony for HHS on 3/19/2025 9:30:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Master Shelby "Pikachu" 
Billionaire  
Testifying for Ohana 
Unity Party & Kingdom of 
The Hawaiian Islands 
Support 
Remotely Via 
Zoom 
 
 
Comments:  
  
Honorable Members of the Hawaii House of Representatives 
State Capitol 
415 South Beretania Street 
Honolulu, HI 96813 
Dear Honorable Representatives, 
I am writing to express my strong support for House Bill No. 302 (H.D. 2), "Relating to 
Cannabis," a vital measure to enhance access to medical cannabis for qualifying patients and 
caregivers across Hawaii. This bill addresses critical barriers in the medical cannabis program, 
ensuring safer, more equitable access to care, and I urge your enthusiastic approval! 
Hawaii’s medical cannabis program is at a crossroads. Registration peaked at 35,444 patients in 
August 2021 but has since dropped over 15% to 30,035 by November 2024. This decline signals 
a troubling shift: patients are turning away from licensed dispensaries toward an illicit market 
due to administrative hurdles, delays, and high costs. H.B. 302 tackles these issues head-on by 
repealing the outdated requirement for an initial in-person consultation to establish a provider-
patient relationship, building on the telehealth flexibility introduced in Act 34 (2021). Here’s 
why this matters: 
• 
Eases Access for Patients: Many qualifying patients—especially those with chronic pain, 
mobility issues, or living in rural areas—struggle to secure in-person appointments. 
Allowing certifications via telehealth removes this barrier, making care more accessible 
and timely. 
• 
Boosts Program Participation: Streamlining registration reverses the 15% patient drop, 
bringing more people back to safe, regulated dispensaries instead of risking unregulated 
products from the illicit market. 
• 
Enhances Safety: Licensed dispensaries offer tested, quality-controlled cannabis, unlike 
illicit sources that may contain contaminants. This bill strengthens public health by 
keeping patients in the legal system. 

• 
Supports Equity: Telehealth empowers caregivers and patients on neighbor islands, 
where medical providers are scarce, ensuring all Hawaiians benefit from the program 
regardless of location. 
By amending Sections 329-123, 329-126, and 453-1.3 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes, H.B. 302 
aligns our laws with modern healthcare realities while maintaining rigorous standards—no 
online questionnaires, just bona fide provider relationships via telehealth. It’s a practical, patient-
centered fix that honors existing permits and prioritizes safety. 
I respectfully urge you to vote in favor of H.B. 302. This bill restores the medical cannabis 
program’s promise: safe, reliable relief for those who need it most. For questions or further 
discussion, please reach me at [Your Phone Number] or [Your Email Address]. Mahalo for 
championing Hawaii’s patients! 
Sincerely, 
Master Shelby "Pikachu" Billionaire, HRM 
Ohana Unity Party, Chairman 
www.Ohanaunityparty.com 
Kingdom of The Hawaiian Islands, H.I. 
 

HB-302-HD-2 
Submitted on: 3/13/2025 10:13:25 AM 
Testimony for HHS on 3/19/2025 9:30:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Mike Golojuch, Sr. 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I'm in strong support of HB302.  Please pass this bill. 
 

HB-302-HD-2 
Submitted on: 3/18/2025 1:03:46 AM 
Testimony for HHS on 3/19/2025 9:30:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Wendy Gibson-Viviani 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
To: COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES and COMMITTEE ON 
COMMERCE AND CONSUMER PROTECTION 
Dear Chairs San Buenaventura and Keohokalole, Vice Chairs Aquino and Fukunaga and 
Members of the Committees. 
My name is Wendy Gibson-Viviani and I’m a Cannabis Nurse Educator who has been a medical 
cannabis patient advocate for over 10 years.  I am a member of the Hawaii Alliance for Cannabis 
Reform.  I’m writing in SUPPORT Of HB302, HD2. I believe it will improve our medical 
cannabis program by expand patient access to certifying providers.  
Patients cannot always travel to a provider to get certified to use cannabis. I know from 
experience. In 2015, I went to California to help my dying father gain access to medical 
cannabis.  He was too weak and in too much pain to travel –so he could not establish a provider-
patient relationship in-person. Fortunately, I was able to locate the only physician in Northern 
California who made house-calls. Having a Tele-health option would have made our lives a lot 
easier.   
Allowing the establishment of the provider-patient relationship through Hawaii-based Tele-
health is an excellent way to expand patient access to Hawaii’s program. 
And, while you’re improving patient access to the medical cannabis program -- please consider 
replacing the list of qualifying conditions with language that would allow the certifying 
providers to decide which patients should be certified.   
Our program’s list covers some of the most prevalent chronic and debilitating 
conditions  however, there are patients who don’t have a condition on the list—who could 
potentially benefit from use.  For example, while we do have ALS on our list, cannabis clinicians 
speculate that cannabis could be useful for treating many other neurological conditions.  They 
report observing positive therapeutic outcomes when treating patients with Traumatic Brain 
Injuries, Autism Spectrum Disorders, Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease. 
One cannabis clinician I spoke to confirmed that nearly every dementia care clinic in Northern 
California has incorporated cannabis into patient care.  Many of these clinics report dramatic 

symptom relief and positive behavioral changes in patients with Alzheimer’s disease.  And, as 
you may know, patients are using it in post stroke recovery.   
Please vote “yes” to improving patient access to Hawaii’s medical cannabis program by 
promoting HB302 HD2. Thank you for the opportunity to share my thoughts. 
Wendy Gibson-Viviani RN, Kailua   
 

HB-302-HD-2 
Submitted on: 3/18/2025 2:53:41 PM 
Testimony for HHS on 3/19/2025 9:30:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Frank Schultz 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I support this initiative. 
 
 	
