HSCR624
STAND.
COM. REP. NO.
624
Honolulu, Hawaii
,
2025
RE:
H.B. No. 727
H.D.
1
Honorable Nadine K. Nakamura
Speaker, House of Representatives
Thirty-Third State Legislature
Regular Session of 2025
State of Hawaii
Madame:
Your Committee on Judiciary
& Hawaiian Affairs, to which was referred H.B. No. 727 entitled:
"A BILL FOR AN ACT RELATING TO THE WOMEN'S
COURT,"
begs leave to report as follows:
The
purpose of this measure is to establish a three-year women's court pilot
program in the Second, Third, and Fifth Circuits of the Judiciary to
acknowledge the distinct pathways that lead women into the criminal justice
system and address their individualized needs.
Specifically, this measure:
(1)
Requires the pilot
program to implement trauma-informed and evidence-based practices, employ
gender-responsive programming, collaborate with stakeholders, and provide
services to women in the court system with the goal of diverting participants
from incarceration, supporting their success in the community, and reducing
recidivism;
(2)
Appropriates funds to
the Judiciary for equipment; mental health, substance abuse treatment, and
other services; and the establishment of seven temporary positions for the
pilot program; and
(3)
Requires the Judiciary
to submit annual reports on the pilot program throughout its duration.
Your Committee received testimony in support of this measure
from the Department of Health; Judiciary; Office of the Public Defender; Office
of the Prosecuting Attorney of the County of Kaua
ʻ
i;
Department of the Prosecuting Attorney of the County of Maui; Community
Alliance on Prisons; Hawaii Substance Abuse Coalition; League of Women Voters
of Hawaii; American Civil Liberties Union of Hawai
ʻ
i;
and two individuals.
Your Committee finds that research has shown that
gender-responsive approaches result in far better outcomes for women who face
unique barriers to success after incarceration.
Women offenders are more likely to be primary caregivers for young
children, have lower educational attainment, lack stable work history, and
experience economic or social marginalization.
This measure seeks to address these barriers and improve outcomes for
women offenders.
Your
Committee has amended this measure by:
(1)
Deleting
language that would have established a three-year women's court pilot program
in the Third Circuit of the Judiciary and instead requiring the Third Circuit
of the Judiciary and Big Island Drug Court to study and submit a report on
establishing a women's court pilot program in the Third Circuit;
(2)
Changing
the number of temporary staff positions established in the Judiciary to an unspecified
amount;
(3)
Inserting
an appropriation for the Department of Health for the women's court pilot
program, including the establishment of positions;
(4)
Changing
the effective date to July 1, 3000, to encourage further discussion; and
(5)
Making
technical, nonsubstantive amendments for the purposes of clarity, consistency,
and style.
Your Committee respectfully requests your Committee on Finance,
should it deliberate on this measure, to consider establishing seven temporary
positions in the Judiciary and an appropriation amount of $801,802 to the
Department of Health, including:
(1)
$145,000 for one full-time equivalent (1.0
FTE) temporary clinical psychologist position;
(2)
$76,788 for one full-time equivalent (1.0 FTE)
temporary social worker/human services professional IV position; and
(3)
$45,216 for one full-time equivalent (1.0 FTE)
temporary social services assistant V position,
to be placed in the Department of Health.
As affirmed by the
record of votes of the members of your Committee on Judiciary & Hawaiian
Affairs that is attached to this report, your Committee is in accord with the
intent and purpose of H.B. No. 727, as amended herein, and recommends that it
pass Second Reading in the form attached hereto as H.B. No. 727, H.D. 1, and be
referred to your Committee on Finance.
Respectfully
submitted on behalf of the members of the Committee on Judiciary & Hawaiian
Affairs,
____________________________
DAVID A. TARNAS, Chair