 
STATE COUNCIL ON MENTAL HEALTH 
Testimony to the Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
In Support of HB727 HD1 SD1 
     March 31, 2025  10:02 a.m., Room 211 and Video 
 
Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki, and Members of the Committee: 
 
Hawaiʻi law, HRS §334-10, established the State Council on Mental 
Health as a 21-member body to advise on the allocation of resources, 
statewide needs, and programs affecting more than one county as well as 
to advocate for adults with serious mental illness, children with serious 
emotional disturbances, individuals with mental illness or emotional 
problems, including those with co-occurring substance abuse disorders. 
Members are residents from diverse backgrounds representing mental 
health service providers and recipients, students and youth, parents, and 
family members. Members include representatives of state agencies on 
mental health, criminal justice, housing, Medicaid/MedQUEST, social 
services, vocational rehabilitation, and education. Members include 
representatives from the Hawaiʻi Advisory Commission on Drug Abuse and 
Controlled Substances and county service area boards on mental health 
and substance abuse. 
 
Most of the State Council on Mental Health members support this 
measure. The Women’s Court is one of the specialty courts that can be life-
changing for people with mental illness or substance use disorders who 
become involved in the criminal justice system. The Women’s Court will 
primarily address those who suffer from high trauma. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. Should you have any 
questions, please contact us at DOH.SCMHChairperson@doh.hawaii.gov. 
. 
 
VISION: A Hawaiʻi where people of all ages with mental health challenges can enjoy recovery in the community of their choice. 
 
MISSON: To advocate for a Hawaiʻi where all persons affected by mental illness can access necessary treatment and support to 
live full lives in the community of their choice. 
JOSH B. GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR OF HAWAIʻI 
KE KIAʻĀINA O KA 
 MOKUʻĀINA ʻO HAWAIʻI 
 
 
 
 
KATHERINE AUMER, PhD 
COUNCIL CHAIRPERSON 
LUNA HOʻOMALU O KA PAPA 
 
 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAIʻI 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 
KA ʻOIHANA OLAKINO 
STATE COUNCIL ON MENTAL HEALTH 
P.O. Box 3378, Room 256 
HONOLULU, HAWAIʻI  96801-3378 
 
 
CHAIRPERSON 
      Katherine Aumer, 
PhD 
 
1st VICE CHAIRPERSON 
      Kathleen Merriam, 
LCSW CSAC 
 
2nd VICE CHAIRPERSON 
      John Betlach 
 
SECRETARY 
     Mary Pat Waterhouse, MHA 
MBA 
 
MEMBERS: 
Tianna Celis-Webster 
Naomi Crozier, CPS 
Lea Dias, MEd 
Jon Fujii, MBA 
Heidi Ilyavi 
Jackie Jackson, CFPS 
Christine Montague-Hicks. 
MEd 
Ray Rice, MEd 
Asianna Saragosa-Torres 
Forrest Wells, MSCP, LMHC 
Kristin Will, MACL, CSAC 
 
EX-OFFICIO: 
Marian Tsuji, Deputy Director 
Behavioral Health 
Administration 
 
WEBSITE: 
scmh.hawaii.gov 
 
EMAIL ADDRESS: 
doh.scmhchairperson@ 
doh.hawaii.gov 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
The Judiciary, State of Hawai‘i 
 
Testimony to the Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 Regular Session 
 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
Senator Donavan M. Dela Cruz, Chair 
Senator Sharon Y. Moriwaki, Vice Chair 
 
Monday, March 31, 2025, 10:02 a.m. 
State Capitol, Conference Room 211 
 
by 
Robert D. S. Kim 
Chief Court Administrator 
Third Circuit Court 
 
 
Bill No. and Title: House Bill No. 727, H.D. 1, S.D. 1, Relating to the Women’s Court. 
 
Purpose: Makes the Women's Court Pilot Program in the First Circuit permanent.  Establishes 
a temporary three-year Women's Court Pilot Program within the Kona division of the Third 
Circuit.  Requires reports.  Establishes temporary positions.  Appropriates funds.  Sunsets 
6/30/2028.  Effective 4/23/2057.  (SD1) 
 
Judiciary's Position:  
 
The Judiciary supports this bill that would establish a three-year Women’s Court Pilot 
Project in the Third Circuit.  However, the Judiciary respectfully requests modifications to the 
appropriations under this bill that would allow the pilot project to be fully funded through fiscal 
year 2027-2028.  Attached to this testimony is a detailed proposal for the establishment of a 
Kona Women’s Court (“KWC”) pilot project in the Third Circuit.  This proposal—originally 
submitted as a proposal for a two-year pilot project—has been updated to reflect the current 
version of the bill, which calls for a three-year pilot project.  As set forth in the proposed budget, 
the cost for a three-year pilot project would be $514,000 for fiscal year 2025-2026; $547,000 for 
fiscal year 2026-2027; and $515,000 for fiscal year 2027-2028.    
 
The Judiciary supports the current version of this bill, which would situate this pilot 
project under the supervision of Big Island Drug Court (“BIDC”).  Our proposal calls for the 
KWC program to be supervised by the Kona Division of BIDC.  This administrative structure is 
 	

House Bill No. 727, H.D. 1, S.D. 1, Relating to the Women’s Court 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
 
Monday, March 31, 2025 
 
Page 2  
 
 
similar to the other successful treatment court programs currently offered in the Third Circuit.  
By situating KWC under the supervision of BIDC with our other treatment court programs, the 
existing BIDC structure and staff can be leveraged at the outset of the program, allowing us to 
supplement existing services with the additional resources to be provided by this bill.  This 
structure will maximize existing resources and allow the program to focus its efforts on 
developing the programming and services that are at the heart of this project.  
 
Additionally, to be an effective use of resources, the KWC program will require a critical 
mass of female probationers in West Hawaiʻi who may be eligible for the program.  The highest-
risk justice-involved women in the Third Circuit are already participating in the BIDC program.  
Thus, our proposal calls for all fourteen (14) of the women currently participating in the Kona 
BIDC program to be screened for eligibility for the KWC program. This will allow the program 
to begin providing services to the target population immediately, instead of waiting for 
individual referrals to trickle in for a standalone program.  If the pilot program is successful, the 
ultimate goal would be to expand the women’s court program to Hilo and make the program 
permanent after the end of the 3-year project period.    
 
To be successful, the BIWC will require sufficient funding and positions, and a good 
prospect of recruiting qualified staff for those positions.  The Judiciary’s proposal contemplates a 
trauma-informed and gender-responsive program tailored to the unique needs of high-risk 
women, with robust mental health, therapeutic, and rehabilitative components.  The proposal also 
calls for a cultural competency component and staff in peer support roles, with all programing to 
be provided in an atmosphere that holds women accountable while providing court-supervised 
treatment, opportunities, and resources.  
 
A truly trauma-informed approach to this program will require extensive mental health 
counseling by trained psychologists, psychiatrists, and/or mental health counselors.  These 
mental health services are severely deficient on Hawaiʻi Island, where a lack of community-
based mental health providers often proves to be an insurmountable barrier to treatment.  
Moreover, our current BIDC staff are not equipped or sufficiently resourced to address these 
complex issues without comprehensive training.  Thus, our proposal for a KWC has a strong 
focus on the development of mental health services, with the hiring of full-time equivalent 
providers, funding for the creation of new services, and training for program staff. 
 
The Judiciary has consulted with the sponsors of this bill—Representative Linda 
Ichiyama and Representative Mahina Poepoe—in the development of the attached proposal.  
Given that this HD1, SD1 contemplates a three-year pilot, the only modification to the current 
bill that is being requested is additional appropriations to ensure that the pilot project is fully 
funded for the duration of the project period.  The proposed budget for KWC is just over $1.5 
million in total for the three-year pilot project.  This investment in KWC will ultimately result in 

House Bill No. 727, H.D. 1, S.D. 1, Relating to the Women’s Court 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
 
Monday, March 31, 2025 
 
Page 3  
 
 
cost savings.  The cost of incarceration of just one person for three years is $277,035.1  This 
means that if KWC helps keep just six (6) women out of prison, the program will have already 
paid for itself, and it is anticipated that this program will help many more women than that.     
 
If the Legislature is supportive of the Judiciary’s proposal, we welcome continued 
discussions during this session.  The Third Circuit and BIDC stand ready to assist the legislature 
in whatever policy decision is made, as long as we have the requested mental health 
professionals on contract or hired by the Judiciary, along with additional staff members to be 
hired by BIDC. 
 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony on this important bill. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1 The average cost of housing an inmate in Hawaiʻi is $253 dollars per day, which totals $92,945 per year. 
See Hawaiʻi Prison Chief Wants Department Changes To Bring ‘Paradigm Shift’, Civil Beat, Retrieved 
on 03-29-25 from <https://www.civilbeat.org/2023/12/hawaii-prison-chief-wants-department-changes-to-
bring-paradigm-shift/>. 

 
 
 
1 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
KONA WOMEN’S COURT:  
A Proposal for a Women’s Justice and Treatment Program in West Hawaiʻi 
Pilot Program: 3 Years 
 
 
I. 
SUMMARY 
This proposal for the formation of a Kona Women’s Court (“KWC”) program as a 
3-year pilot project under the umbrella of the well-established Big Island Drug Court 
(“BIDC”). By developing KWC under the pre-existing drug court program, the KWC pilot 
project will use the established structures of drug court as its “backbone”, thereby 
enabling the development of a successful program, notwithstanding the practical 
limitations of the Third Circuit’s dual-docket courts. Positioning the KWC program under 
the supervision of drug court will also guarantee the most effective use of resources and 
maximum benefit to the target population of women that the Women’s Court model aims 
to serve. The KWC program requires a critical mass of women participants, and all of the 
fourteen (14) women already participating in Kona BIDC are at high risk for recidivism, 
have high rates of substance abuse, and have high mental health needs. This proposal 
therefore envisions KWC as a division of Kona drug court with distinct eligibility 
requirements, gender-responsive programming, and mental health services and 
treatment options that are specially designed to address the needs of justice-involved 
women in Hawaiʻi Island’s rural community.  
II. 
PURPOSE 
A. Due to Resource Requirements and the Structure of the Circuit Courts in the 
Third Circuit, There Is a Need to Develop the Women’s Court Program under 
the Auspices of Big Island Drug Court. 
 The Circuit Courts of the Third Circuit are structured very differently from those in 
the First Circuit. There are only four (4) Circuit Court judges in the Third Circuit, and all of 
them, including the two (2) judges assigned to drug court, are responsible for hearing all 
case types, including all criminal and civil cases, agency appeals, environmental court 
cases, special proceedings, and more. Moreover, due to Hawaiʻi Island’s size, the Third 
Circuit is the only circuit with two courthouses housing Circuit Courts. These courthouses 
are situated nearly 100 miles apart, and each courthouse services distinct geographic 
areas of the island—the Hilo Circuit Court hears cases from East Hawaiʻi, including the 
districts of North and South Hilo, Puna, and Hāmākua, and the Kona Circuit Court hears 
cases from West Hawaiʻi, including the districts of North and South Kona, North and South 
Kohala, and Kaʻū.  
Because of the Circuit Court’s dual-docket calendars and the geography of the 
island, it has never been feasible in the Third Circuit to have single, standalone specialty 
courts dedicated exclusively to the treatment court model, as has been done successfully 
in the First Circuit.  Nevertheless, the Third Circuit has a long history of the successful 
implementation of the treatment court model in spite of these limitations, beginning with 
the BIDC program. 

 
 
 
2 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
Big Island Drug Court is a specialty treatment court first established in the Third 
Circuit over twenty (20) years ago, in 2002. The BIDC program is dedicated to reducing 
recidivism and supporting individuals with substance use disorders and co-occurring 
mental health issues, through a structured, evidence-based approach that integrates 
judicial oversight with intensive treatment, supervision, and accountability measures. 
BIDC operates programs in both Hilo and Kona, and it currently has over 100 participants, 
including twenty-five (25) women, engaged in substance use treatment, frequent drug 
testing, judicial monitoring, group activities, and supportive services designed to promote 
recovery and long-term stability. 
Due to the success of the BIDC program over the years, the Third Circuit also 
implemented a Veterans’ Treatment Court program in 2014, as well as a Juvenile 
Treatment Court program. These programs are not standalone courts, but rather distinct 
programs operated by drug court staff and stationed under the supervision of BIDC. This 
proposal seeks to add a Women’s Court program to the quiver of specialty programming 
offered to probationers in West Hawaiʻi, under the auspices of Kona BIDC. If the pilot 
program is successful, the ultimate goal would be to expand the Women’s Court program 
to Hilo and make the program permanent after the end of the 3-year project period.  
By leveraging the existing BIDC structure and staff at the outset, the Third Circuit 
will be able to supplement existing drug court services in Kona with the additional services 
to be provided through this measure—services that justice-involved women on Hawaiʻi 
Island desperately need. Through a Women’s Court program that is well-tailored to the 
Third Circuit’s unique court structure, and, most importantly, that is responsive to the 
individual needs of justice-involved women, the Judiciary looks forward to the opportunity 
to participate in this revolutionary pilot project.     
B. There Is a Need to Develop Critical Resources and Services in West Hawaiʻi. 
Due to the severe shortage of community-based treatment options on Hawaiʻi 
Island, developing, creating, and sustaining community-wide resources and treatment 
capacity is critical to ensuring the success of the KWC pilot project. The lack of 
community-based mental health services on the island is particularly severe. In 2023, the 
final report of the Adult Mental Health Summit2, held by the Hawaiʻi County Mayor’s Office, 
concluded that there are serious barriers to accessing mental health services island-wide, 
and that there is a “lack of a comprehensive continuum of care”.3 The group found that in 
Hawaiʻi County, there is a “lack of alternatives to hospitalization or encounters with law 
enforcement when someone is experiencing a [mental health] crisis”, with the shortage 
of mental health providers in the community standing as a significant barrier to accessing 
                                                 
2 The Adult Mental Health Summit included participants from a wide-range of community stakeholders, 
including government agencies such as the Department of Health.  
3 Hawaiʻi County Office of the Mayor (2023). Adult Mental Health Summit August 2023 – Summary 
Report. Retrieved Feb. 11, 2025 from 
<https://www.hawaiicounty.gov/home/showdocument?id=307444&t=638453177631770000>. 

 
 
 
3 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
treatment.4 The group underscored the pressing need for funding to attract mental health 
professionals to Hawaiʻi County and ensure retention.5 
This shortage of community-based providers is particularly acute for justice-
involved women, as the few existing providers are often reluctant to take on patients with 
justice-system involvement. The providers who do take on justice-involved clients already 
have overwhelming caseloads, which hinders their ability to provide timely and consistent 
treatment. The community-based providers available are also located off-site, creating 
practical challenges for patients who may not have access to reliable transportation or 
access to the technology needed for telehealth appointments. These providers also have 
established practices, and their ability to cater to the specific needs of women may be 
limited. 
Only with funding to develop community resources and provide direct services in 
West Hawaiʻi, will KWC be able to address the individualized needs of women with a 
trauma-informed and gender-responsive approach. Accordingly, KWC seeks funding to 
develop services in the following areas through contracted direct services and training for 
KWC staff:  
• Timely Screening of At-Risk Women 
• Mental and Behavioral Health Services, Including Psychiatric Care and 
Medication Management 
• Access to Trauma-Informed Therapies that Meet Individual Needs 
• Substance Use Disorder Treatment 
• Peer Support 
• Housing 
• Cultural Activities and Practices 
• Case Management Services 
• Increased Testing and Laboratory Confirmation  
In addition to the development of these critical services and treatment options for 
KWC clients, program participants would also have access to established Kona drug court 
resources through available community-based services. These existing services can 
provide classes, treatment, and support in the areas of domestic violence, including 
survivor counseling; education and vocational training; life-skill training, such as financial 
literacy classes; and family support resources, including parenting classes and 
relationship improvement resources. KWC probation officers would coordinate referrals 
to these community-based providers based on a risk-needs assessment.  
The combination of these existing services with the new, direct services proposed 
herein will ensure that Women’s Court clients are receiving the support they truly require 
in light of their particular backgrounds and needs.     
                                                 
4 Id. 
5 Id. 

 
 
 
4 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
C. The Pilot Program Will Focus on West Hawaii’s Most At-Risk Women, While 
Offering Services to Priority 2 Women When Possible.  
Currently there are fourteen (14) women participating in the BIDC program in 
Kona. These women are considered “Priority 1” clients, meaning they have been 
assessed as having a high risk for recidivism, high rates of substance abuse, and high 
mental health needs. These high-risk women nearly universally have histories of abuse, 
trauma, poverty, and other risk factors that intersect with their involvement in the criminal 
justice system. Women who have been incarcerated are more likely to report extensive 
histories of emotional, physical, and sexual abuse, with between 70% and 90% of 
incarcerated women reporting past abuse.6 To illustrate this reality, of the fourteen (14) 
women currently in Kona drug court, all have a history of trauma, and (13) thirteen have 
a mental health diagnosis. These mental health diagnoses include serious conditions, 
such as major depressive disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder (“PTSD”), bipolar 
disorder, and borderline personality disorder, which require extensive and careful 
treatment and management.    
On Hawaiʻi Island, women confronted with these challenges face unique barriers 
to treatment and recovery—and not only in the area of mental health services. Hawaiʻi 
County is a large, rural county spanning over 4,000 square miles7; many areas of the 
island are remote and have poor or nonexistent access to critical services, such as public 
transportation and medical care. Hawaiʻi County also has the highest poverty rate in the 
State at 13.8%, with an average household income of only $68,3998—with the poorest 
areas of the County having a median household income of only $50,313 per year.9  
Hawaiʻi Island also has high rates of domestic violence. Between 2021 and 2023, 
there was over a 60% increase in the number of participants in programs aimed at the 
prevention of domestic violence.10 Child and Family Services (“CFS”) has reported that 
between 2018 and 2020, one domestic violence shelter in Hawaiʻi County served more 
survivors than any other CFS shelter in the State.11  
                                                 
6 Childhood Trauma and Women’s Health Outcomes in a California Prison Population, PubMed Central 
(Oct. 2006). Retrieved Feb. 11, 2025 from 
<https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1586137/#:~:text=One%20key%20finding%20from%20this,wo
men%20in%20the%20general%20population>. 
7 U.S. Census Bureau (2023). American Community Survey 1-year estimates. Retrieved Feb. 6, 2025 
from Census Reporter Profile page for Hawaii County, 
HI <http://censusreporter.org/profiles/05000US15001-hawaii-county-hi/>. 
8 Hawaiʻi State Data Center, Census Data Highlights (Dec. 8, 2021), Retrieved Feb. 11, 2025 from 
<https://files.hawaii.gov/dbedt/census/acs/acs2021/5yr/ACS21_5yr_highlights.pdf>.  
9 U.S. Census Bureau (2023). American Community Survey 5-year estimates. Retrieved from Census 
Reporter Profile page for Kaʻū CCD, Hawaiʻi County, HI 
<https://censusreporter.org/profiles/06000US1500191170-kau-ccd-hawaii-county-hi/>.  
10 Domestic violence program enrollments spike on Big Island. West Hawaiʻi Today (Oct. 10, 2023). 
Retrieved on Feb. 11, 2025 from < https://www.westhawaiitoday.com/2023/10/18/hawaii-news/domestic-
violence-program-enrollments-spike-on-big-island/>. 
11 Id.  

 
 
 
5 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
The problems of domestic violence, poverty, and a lack of access to employment 
opportunities, transportation, and mental health care are issues that disproportionately 
impact women, who are more likely to be victims of violence and are more likely to have 
dependent children in their care. In consideration of these social realities, closing the 
service gap for the most at-risk women in West Hawaiʻi is imperative.   
Due to their risk-factors, all Priority 1 women currently in Kona drug court would be 
assessed and considered for the expanded, gender-responsive and individualized 
services and programming to be offered through KWC. For the duration of the pilot 
project, any women referred to BIDC or Veteran’s Treatment Court in Kona would also 
be assessed for the Women’s Court program. However, due to the acute lack of 
community-based services on the Big Island, especially in the areas of mental health, the 
KWC staff would also seek to provide services to Priority 2 justice-involved women, who 
have lower risk factors, whenever possible.     
 
Priority 2 women who would be considered for assistance would be women on 
supervision with Hawaiʻi Intake Service Center (“HISC”) and women on regular probation 
in Kona who are not high enough risk or otherwise do not meet the eligibility criteria for 
referral to a treatment court program. These women also experience barriers to treatment 
and lack access to mental health services, including crisis stabilization, which can 
interfere with successful completion of probation. Currently, there are forty-five (45) 
women on supervision with HISC and thirty-seven (37) who are on regular probation 
supervision in Kona, for a total of eighty-two (82) Priority 2 women who could be assessed 
for mental health needs. The actual number of Priority 2 women who would be provided 
with treatment, services, or other interventions, such as trauma treatment, psychiatric 
medication, housing stabilization, case management, and linkages with other community-
based services would be based on the results of individual assessments.  
While the focus of the pilot project is to help the most at-risk women in West 
Hawaiʻi, it is anticipated that KWC staff will be able to provide critical services to many of 
these Priority 2 women, and possibly even to some men, on a case-by-case basis. This 
will ensure that the program’s investments in direct services are utilized to their maximum 
potential and contribute to positive outcomes for the largest number of women.  
D. The Program 
a. Eligibility Criteria & Disqualifications 
The Third Circuit’s vision for Women’s Court aims to utilize best practice standards 
from the treatment court model to address the needs of Priority 1 women in a gender-
responsive format. Because KWC would be built on the foundation of BIDC, there is 
substantial overlap between the proposed eligibility criteria and exclusion factors for KWC 
and those of the drug court program.  
The current, proposed eligibility criteria and disqualification factors for the KWC 
pilot project are as follows: 
1. Proposed Eligibility Criteria: 
• Must be at least eighteen (18) years old; 

 
 
 
6 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
• Must reside in area supervised by Kona probation; 
• Must have a history of or evidence of current substance abuse and/or 
mental health issues; 
• Must be convicted of or on status for a felony offense; 
• Must voluntarily agree to participate in Konaa Women’s Court; and  
• Must fully participate in the Kona Women’s Court screening process, 
including the LSI-R and be assessed as high risk for recidivism and as 
having high treatment needs. 
2. Proposed Disqualifications: 
• Convicted of any sex offense that requires or may trigger registration; 
• Convicted of an offense that carries a mandatory prison sentence; 
• Pending charges that would interfere with treatment court participation; 
• Convicted of any previous or pending Class A felony; 
• Convicted of a drug trafficking offense within the last ten (10) years; 
• Is working as a confidential informant; 
• Has been determined by the Kona Women’s Court team to suffer from 
a mental illness or developmental disability that will not allow the 
defendant to complete the program requirements, but only when it is 
also determined that the defendant cannot be stabilized with the 
resources and services available; or 
• Is presently on status for any violent offense, defined as: 
i. Offenses that involve the discharge of a firearm or threat of harm 
with firearm; 
ii. Any offense that involves death or that results in great bodily 
harm to the victim; 
iii. Class B felony violent offenses (other than sexual offenses 
covered above).  
Consistent with treatment court best practices, the eligibility criteria of BIDC is 
revised periodically to ensure that criteria are in line with current evidence and best 
practices. The eligibility criteria for KWC will also be subject to this periodic revision, to 
ensure that the program is meeting the needs of the target population. As such, the 
foregoing proposed eligibility criteria and exclusion factors are likely to change over time, 
especially if the pilot project is extended beyond the current 3-year proposal.  
b. Referral & Screening Process 

 
 
 
7 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
The KWC will accept referrals of women to the program in the same way that 
referrals are currently made to Kona’s BIDC and Veteran’s Treatment Court programs. 
These referrals are made by judges after defendants have been convicted of a crime, and 
while they are pending sentencing. The screening process will utilize best practices, 
including the Level of Service Inventory-Revised (“LSI-R”) assessment tool, which is a 
standardized, evidence-based assessment tool widely used to identify an offender’s risk 
of reoffending and to inform treatment and supervision plans. Because the Third Circuit’s 
Women’s Court structure would situate KWC under the supervision of BIDC, all women 
referred to Kona BIDC or Veteran’s Treatment Court would also be automatically 
screened for eligibility for the KWC program. This allows for maximum flexibility and 
treatment options for high-risk women.  
For example, if a woman is a veteran who would benefit from Veteran’s Court 
programming, upon referral to Kona Veteran’s Court, she would also be assessed for 
KWC eligibility automatically, without the need for an additional referral. If her risk-needs 
assessment shows she would also benefit from the services and programming of KWC, 
the proposed structure of KWC would allow such a woman to take full advantage of both 
programs simultaneously and seamlessly, without needing to choose one or the other.   
c. Court Sessions & Program Activities 
As with other treatment courts, and consistent with treatment court best practices, 
KWC would hold court sessions with the judge and other members of the Women’s Court 
team, where all women admitted to the program would participate approximately twice 
per month. Along with group court hearings, KWC would provide group activities, 
including group therapy, cultural activities, and peer mentorship and support on a regular 
basis. Group sessions with the judge, as well as group programming, are essential to 
building trust in the program and in the justice system. Group programming also builds 
camaraderie and prosocial bonds between participants. These activities are also integral 
to fostering a safe, women-only environment where women can feel secure and 
comfortable sharing openly with their peers and program staff.  
d. Cultural Component 
Best practices dictate that culturally responsive evaluation and treatment planning 
are essential to successful treatment and recovery.12 It is vital that the programming 
offered by KWC is culturally sensitive and relevant to the needs of the women in the 
program. Over 44% of incarcerated women in Hawaiʻi are Native Hawaiian, despite 
making up only 19.8% of the state’s total female population.13 Therefore, the KWC 
                                                 
12 See Improving Cultural Competence. Treatment Improvement Protocol (TIP) Series, No. 59. Center for 
Substance Abuse Treatment (US). Rockville (MD): Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration (US); 2014. Retrieved from National Library of Medicine – National Center for 
Biotechnology Information on Feb. 13, 2025 at 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK248423/#:~:text=Just%20as%20culture%20shapes%20an%20i
ndividual's%20sense,be%20aware%20of%20how%20the%20client's%20culture>. 
13 Impact of the Criminal Justice System on Native Hawaiians. OHA Fact Sheet. Retrieved on Feb. 11, 
2025 from <https://www.oha.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/factsheets_final_web_0.pdf>. 

 
 
 
8 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
envisions working with Cultural Advisors to make sure that goals and program content 
are culturally relevant to maximize the benefit of the program to Native Hawaiian women 
and women from other marginalized groups.  
   The Cultural Advisors selected will be well versed in dealing with multicultural 
groups of women who come from a variety of backgrounds. They will employ values 
universal to most (if not all) cultures, presented in a Hawaiian way. No particular religion 
will be forced, and the Cultural Advisors and KWC team will be as sensitive to as possible 
to all cultural groups.  
E. Program Evaluation 
Besides Hawaiʻi, there are only a few other jurisdictions in the country that have 
begun Women’s Court programs. As such, there are no established best practices for 
Women’s Court programs. The KWC team will therefore need to thoughtfully implement 
current treatment court best practices in the development of the program, such as the use 
of treatment interventions specific to women’s issues, including treatment for PTSD and 
trauma. Because of the relatively novel nature of this trailblazing project, the program 
evaluation component will be extremely important and will involve careful study.  
It is anticipated that an outside researcher may be invited to do a study on the 
KWC and assist with program evaluation, due to the impacts this program may have on 
national best practice standards. As such, the proposed budget included herein includes 
an amount for program evaluation.   
F. Other Services 
While the focus of the KWC pilot project will be on developing a comprehensive 
Women’s Court Program for Priority 1 women in West Hawaiʻi, the hope is that the 
injection of funding and development of community-based resources through this 
program will benefit other justice-involved individuals, such as Priority 2 women—
especially those needing critical mental health services. These “extracurricular” services 
would be offered on a case-by-case basis when determined appropriate by the KWC 
team, and only when doing so would not detract from the services needed for Priority 1 
women in the KWC program.  
Allowing the flexibility of providing services to individuals outside the KWC program 
will ensure that the resources furnished through this pilot project are being utilized to their 
maximum potential and can be adapted for a variety of individual cases and 
circumstances.    
III. 
The Court’s Structure & Proposed Budget 
A. The Team 
Because the KWC pilot project will use the pre-existing staff and structures of the 
BIDC program to address the needs of women already participating in drug court, the 
KWC team will consist of the dedicated team of BIDC probation officers and staff, as well 
as specially trained professionals in direct service provider positions. Due to the lack of 

 
 
 
9 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
community-based service providers on the Big Island, discussed in detail above, funding 
sufficient to recruit and retain full-time mental health professionals, as well as funding for 
adequate training of program staff, are absolutely imperative to the success of the pilot 
project. Only through the development of new services will the KWC be able to guarantee 
that women in the program will have both access to necessary services and consistency 
of treatment.  
Therefore, this proposal seeks funding for the following service provider positions 
and services: 
1. Women’s Mental Health Professional (1FTE) (POS Contractor(s)): KWC 
would seek to hire a Women’s Mental Health Professional. This mental health 
professional would have a full-time equivalent (“FTE”) position and would be 
assigned to the Keahuolū courthouse, to enable them to provide consistent and 
timely mental and behavioral health services. This mental health professional 
would ensure timely screening of at-risk women, including at the jail, at the 
courthouse, or in the community, and they would be able to provide treatment 
directly, including treatment for trauma, substance use disorder, and mental 
health issues specific to women. They would also be available to help stabilize 
justice-involved women, so that the legal process can take place and 
community-based treatments can begin. Additionally, this professional would 
be able to offer medication assisted treatment and a variety of therapies, 
including behavioral therapies, group therapy, and more. Having a dedicated, 
full-time Women’s Mental Health Professional to provide direct services and 
assist clients with referrals and connections with longer-term treatment, crisis 
stabilization, case management, Department of Health services, and other 
community mental health resources is critical to ensuring continuity of care for 
women in the program.  
2. Women’s Behavioral Health Beds (POS Contractor(s)): To facilitate 
effective treatment, recovery, and case management, it is essential to have 
beds available in facilities that will provide support staff to address substance 
use issues and facilitate mental health treatment, including crisis stabilization 
and medication compliance. Currently there are no dual-diagnosis beds 
available to probationers in the Third Circuit. Funding for behavioral health beds 
would ensure that the highest-risk women have access to secure, women-only 
housing where they can receive support for all of their needs. With the funds 
requested in the proposed budget outlined below, it is anticipated that one of 
the service providers already contracted to provide bedspaces to Kona drug 
court clients will be able to dedicate a house specifically for women in KWC—
with anywhere from three (3) to six (6) bedspaces being reserved for KWC’s 
exclusive use at any given time.  
3. Cultural Practitioner(s) & Advisor(s) (POS Contractor(s)): Best practices 
have long dictated that culturally responsive and culturally relevant evaluation, 
objectives, and treatment result in better outcomes for individuals receiving 
substance abuse and mental health treatment. KWC would utilize Cultural 

 
 
 
10 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
Advisors to run cultural activities and group sessions. Cultural Advisors would 
also assist the KWC team to ensure treatment goals and methods are culturally 
relevant, and that individual treatment plans and the services provided by the 
program are sensitive to participants’ backgrounds, beliefs, and practices, to 
the extent possible.  
4. Drug Court Peer Specialist(s) (1FTE) (POS Contractor(s)): Mentorship 
plays a vital role in substance abuse treatment, because it provides a crucial 
layer of support, accountability, and shared experience for individuals in 
addiction recovery. While mentorship is considered a best practice in 
substance abuse treatment, it is particularly critical for women to have access 
to effective mentorship, as studies have shown that women are less 
comfortable talking about substance use than their male counterparts, and less 
likely to seek help or treatment.14 KWC would hire former female drug court 
graduates in peer support roles to ensure that participants in the program 
receive mentorship that is responsive to the unique needs of women.  
In addition to these essential positions, KWC will also seek funding for a Probation 
Supervisor position, as well as for funding for training of KWC staff. 
5. Kona Probation Supervisor (1FTE) (Judiciary Staff): Additional staffing 
within the probation division will be necessary to manage and implement KWC 
deliverables for program participants. There is already an existing gap in Kona 
probation, where the BIDC probation officers currently lack a supervisor. In all 
other probation divisions there is supervisor position for every 3-4 probation 
officers. The added supervision and administrative burdens of an additional 
treatment court program will necessitate that this gap in staffing be addressed.  
6. KWC Staff Training: Within the first year of the pilot project, KWC would seek 
to have its team members participate in available local and online trainings. In 
year two (2) of the program, the Kona team, consisting of up to fifteen (15) team 
members15, would travel to the national All Rise conference. All Rise is the 
national organization for training in the treatment court model16, and it is the 
author of the Adult Treatment Court Best Practice Standards—considered the 
gold standard for treatment courts nationally. Training and conference 
                                                 
14 See Women’s barriers to specialty substance abuse treatment: A qualitative exploration of racial/ethnic 
differences. PubMed Central (Aug. 2021). Retrieved on Feb. 13, 2025 from 
<https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7075735/>. 
15 Teams would include the KWC probation officers, probation supervisor, assigned judge, service 
providers, and, funding permitted, the assigned Deputy Public Defender, Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, 
and Hawaiʻi Police Department Officer.   
16 All Rise began 30 years ago as the National Association of Drug Court Professionals. In 2023, the 
organization rebranded as “All Rise” to reflect the organization’s focus on all treatment courts, including 
Family Treatment Court, DUI Court, Juvenile Treatment Court, and others.  

 
 
 
11 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
attendance is essential to ensure that the KWC program is implementing 
treatment court best practices, based on the most current evidence available. 
Additionally, as Hawaiʻi is one of the first states in the nation to implement a 
Women’s Court program, conference attendance will provide significant 
opportunities to spread the Women’s Court model to other jurisdictions.    
Finally, the KWC program would seek to contract with vendors and providers to 
provide access to Moral Reconation Therapy (“MRT”) and increased drug testing and 
greater laboratory confirmation capacities. KWC is also seeking funding for technology to 
support program operations, including computer workstations, so that program 
participants can have reliable internet access. 
7. Moral Reconation Therapy & Training (Contracted): KWC will seek to 
contract with therapists who can provide MRT group sessions to program 
participants and train KWC staff in the MRT methodology. MRT is a cognitive 
behavioral therapy designed to address severe criminal thinking. It is effective 
in treating substance abuse, trauma, patterns of domestic violence, and other 
issues that intersect with women’s involvement in criminal behavior. Studies 
have shown that offenders who receive MRT are far less likely to be re-arrested 
or re-incarcerated. One study that tracked nearly 1,400 participants over 20 
years found that the use of MRT reduced the likelihood of an offender being re-
incarcerated by nearly 30%.17  By training the KWC staff in MRT, the program 
can build the capacity to sustainably provide justice-involved women with the 
tools needed to change their thought processes, make better decisions, and 
ultimately reduce recidivism.  
8. Increased Drug Testing & Greater Laboratory Confirmation Capabilities 
(Vendors): Funding for increased capacity and effectiveness of drug testing 
and laboratory confirmation will be essential to monitoring the compliance of 
women in the KWC program and ensuring effectiveness of treatment. With the 
integration of critical mental health services and treatment through the pilot 
project, program staff will need the ability to confirm compliance with psychiatric 
and other prescribed medication through laboratory testing. The use of sweat 
patches and Smartstart technology for KWC will also ensure that participants 
can be adequately monitored for compliance with drug and alcohol conditions 
while in the community, when standard urine testing is not practical. For 
example, if a client needs to travel the mainland for medical treatment, currently 
                                                 
17 20-year study finds MRT Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy reduces re-arrests and re-incarceration. GEO 
Reentry Services (Sept. 30, 2011). Retrieved Feb. 13, 2025 from <https://www.georeentry.com/20-year-
study-finds-mrt-cognitive-behavioral-therapy-reduces-re-arrests-and-re-
incarceration/#:~:text=After%2020%20years%2C%2094%25%20of,rate%20dropped%20significantly%20
to%2061%25>. 

 
 
 
12 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
there is no way to monitor her compliance during the travel period. With a sweat 
patch, the client’s probation officer would be able to verify compliance. 
9. Technology: As set forth in the proposed program budget below, funding is 
being sought for technology to support program operations, including 
computers for additional staff, as well as a computer workstation in the Kona 
probation waiting area. This workstation would be available for clients to use 
for job applications and searches, applications to educational and training 
programs, housing applications, and similar, essential administrative tasks. 
Many justice-involved women in our rural community lack reliable access to the 
internet at home. Internet access is required to do the most basic of tasks in 
our modern, digital world. Having computers available so that program 
participants have guaranteed access to the internet every time they come to 
court would be a significant step to closing this digital divide.   
B. 3-Year Pilot Program Budget 
 
Three-Year Pilot Program Budget: 
 
 
Breakdown of Estimated Training Costs: 
 
 
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Services
Annual Cost
Annual Cost
Annual Cost
n
Total Cost
Women's Mental Health Professional (1FTE)
175,000.00
$           
175,000.00
$           
175,000.00
$           
525,000.00
$           
Womens Behavioral  Health Beds
100,000.00
$           
100,000.00
$           
100,000.00
$           
300,000.00
$           
Kona Drug Court  Probation Supervisor (1FTE)
85,000.00
$             
85,000.00
$             
85,000.00
$             
255,000.00
$           
Cultural Practitioner and Advisor
30,000.00
$             
30,000.00
$             
30,000.00
$             
90,000.00
$             
Peer Specialist (1FTE)
80,000.00
$             
80,000.00
$             
80,000.00
$             
240,000.00
$           
Moral Reconation Therapy
25,000.00
$             
25,000.00
$             
25,000.00
$             
75,000.00
$             
Increased Drug Testing/Lab confirmation
10,000.00
$             
10,000.00
$             
10,000.00
$             
30,000.00
$             
Training
5,000.00
$                
42,000.00
$             
-
$                          
47,000.00
$             
Technology
4,900.00
$                
-
$                          
-
$                          
4,900.00
$                
Program Evaluation
-
$                          
-
$                          
10,000.00
$             
10,000.00
$             
Total
514,900.00
$           
547,000.00
$           
515,000.00
$           
1,576,900.00
$       
Training:
Cost
Year 1:  Local and Other Trainings
$5,000
Year 2:  Kona Team : All Rise National Conference 
(Washington DC)
42,000.00
$          
Total Training Cost:
$47,000

 
 
 
13 
 
2025 Legislative Session                                                         Kona Women’s Court Proposal – Third Circuit 
 
Breakdown of Estimated Technology Costs: 
 
 
Technology:
Kona Cost
Computer Workstation (in Probation Waiting A
1,200.00
$           
Computer for Kona Probation Supervisor
1,000.00
$           
Printer for Kona Probation Supervisor
1,000.00
$           
Cellphone for Field Work Kona Prob . Sup
500.00
$               
Kona Laptop for Work in Rural Communities
1,200.00
$           
Total:
4,900.00
$           

JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
 GOVERNOR OF HAWAII 
KE KIAʻĀINA O KA MOKUʻĀINA ʻO HAWAIʻI 
KENNETH S. FINK, M.D., M.G.A, M.P.H 
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH 
KA LUNA HOʻOKELE 
 
STATE OF HAWAII 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 
KA ʻOIHANA OLAKINO 
P. O. Box 3378 
Honolulu, HI  96801-3378 
doh.testimony@doh.hawaii.gov 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony in SUPPORT of HB727 HD1 SD1 
RELATING TO THE WOMEN’S COURT  
SENATOR DONOVAN DELA CRUZ, CHAIR 
SENATOR SHARON MORIWAKI, VICE CHAIR 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS 
 
Hearing Date and Time: March 31, 2025,10:02 a.m. Location: Room 211& Video 
 
Fiscal Implications: The Department of Health (“Department”) requests funding for this 
1 
measure be considered as a vehicle to expand services, including staff support, provided it does 
2 
not supplant the requests outlined in the Governor's executive budget request. 
3 
Department Position: The Department supports this measure and offers comments.  
4 
Department Testimony:  The Adult Mental Health Division provides the following testimony on 
5 
behalf of the Department. 
6 
The Department supports this measure which proposes to make the women's court 
7 
pilot program in the first circuit permanent, establish a three-year Women’s Court pilot 
8 
program in the circuit court of the Kona division of the third circuit, and require the judiciary to 
9 
submit a report to the legislature regarding the need for and the associated costs of a pilot 
10 
program for women's court in the second and fifth circuits and Hilo division of the third circuit. 
11 
The intent of the measure is to implement trauma informed and evidence-based practices, 
12 
employ gender-responsive programming, collaborate with stakeholders, and provide services to 
13 
women in the court system with the goal of diverting participants from incarceration, 
14 
supporting their success in the community, and reducing recidivism. 
15 
 	

HB727 HD1 SD1 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
 
Mohala Wahine, which was established in the first circuit by Act 243, SLH 2022, has 
1 
been operational since January 2023. In 2024, through our collaborative partnership with the 
2 
Judiciary, the Department conducted 33 mental health screenings and 24 psychological 
3 
assessments of participants for the program. The services offered by the program are 
4 
comprehensive and provide an opportunity for participants to achieve meaningful and lasting 
5 
recovery. The Department defers to the Judiciary on the feasibility of a pilot project and study 
6 
implementation. 
7 
Offered Amendments:  The Department requests a budget of $221,788 to support the Kona 
8 
division pilot project, which is based on the Department’s staffing requirements for the 
9 
operation of the existing Women’s Court pilot project of the First Circuit. The Department’s role 
10 
has been to provide screening and assessments of possible eligible participants for the 
11 
program, including forensic mental health consultation and coordination. The specific positions 
12 
required to provide support for the Kona division pilot project include the following: 
13 
1.0 FTE Clinical Psychologist [$145,000] to provide forensic psychological consultation 
14 
on program eligibility and assessments. 
15 
1.0 FTE Social Worker/Human Services Professional IV [$76,788] to conduct screenings 
16 
and provide forensic coordination for interim time-sensitive case management 
17 
services. 
18 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this measure. 
19 

RICHARD T. BISSEN, JR. 
Mayor 
 
ANDREW H. MARTIN 
Prosecuting Attorney 
 
SHELLY C. MIYASHIRO 
First Deputy Prosecuting Attorney 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE PROSECUTING ATTORNEY 
COUNTY OF MAUI 
200 SOUTH HIGH STREET 
WAILUKU, MAUI, HAWAI’I  96793 
           PHONE (808) 270-7777  •  FAX (808) 270-7625 
 
TESTIMONY ON 
H.B. 727 HD1 SD1 
RELATING TO THE WOMEN’S COURT 
 
March 29, 2025 
 
 
 
 
The Honorable Donovan Dela Cruz 
Chair 
The Honorable Sharon Y. Moriwaki 
Vice Chair 
and Members of the Committee on Ways and Means 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki, and Members of the Committee: 
 
The Department of the Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui respectfully submits the 
following comments in support of H.B. 727 HD1 SD1, Relating to the Women’s Court. This 
bill would, inter alia, make the Mohala Wahine program in the First Circuit permanent, establish 
a three-year women’s court pilot program in the Third Circuit Kona division, and require the 
Judiciary to submit a report to the legislature regarding the need for and associated costs of a 
pilot program for women’s court in the Second and Fifth Circuits as well as the Hilo division of 
the Third Circuit. 
 
 
The Department of the Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui supports this bill because 
in addition to making the Mohala Wahine program permanent, it would provide a needed 
alternative to incarceration for women within the Third Circuit, particularly women with a high 
risk of recidivism and in need of services in addition to existing substance abuse and mental 
health treatment programs. We also support the program’s use of trauma-informed and evidence-
based practices. Finally, we support exploring the possibility that a similar program to the 
Mohala Wahine program in the First Circuit could be established in the Second and Fifth 
Circuits, as well as the Hilo division of the Third Circuit. 
 
 
For these reasons, the Department of the Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui supports 
H.B. 727 HD1 SD1.  Please feel free to contact our office at (808) 270-7777 if you have any 
questions or inquiries. Thank you very much for the opportunity to provide testimony. 

 
LEAGUE OF WOMEN VOTERS OF HAWAII 
P.O. Box 235026 ♦ Honolulu, HI 96823 
Voicemail 808.377.6727 ♦ my.lwv.org/hawaii ♦ voters@lwvhi.org 
 
 
 
Committee on Ways and Means 
Chair Donovan M. Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Sharon Y. Moriwaki 
 
March 31, 2025 at 10:02 am in CR 211 & Videoconference 
HB 727 SD1 A Bill Relating to Women’s Court 
 
TESTIMONY 
Stephen Munkelt, Legislative Committee, League of Women Voters of Hawaii 
 
 
Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki, and Committee Members: 
 
The League of Women Voters of Hawaii supports BILL NUMBER HB 727 SD1 
 
The League of Women Voters supports HB 727 SD1. The League believes that 
evidence-based programs can reduce recidivism and provide a path to stable, 
successful reintegration in the community for women who have suffered a criminal 
conviction. Such programs are also fiscally responsible, as supportive services are far 
less costly than incarceration when a person reoffends.  
 
When women get support dealing with addiction, abuse, and poverty through evidence-
based programs, education, and training it benefits their children and families, 
neighbors, and the Hawai’i community at large. With this bill the lessons learned in the 
first district can be applied to bring successful outcomes to a larger number of women, 
for the good of all.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of HB 727 SD1 

 
 
HB727 HD1 SD1 Women’s Court 
COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS 
Senator Donovan M. Dela Cruz, Chair 
Senator Sharon Y. Moriwaki, Vice Chair 
Wednesday, Mar 31, 2025: 10:02: Room 211 Videoconference 
 
 
 
Hawaii Substance Abuse Coalition Supports HB727 HD1 SD1: 
 
ALOHA CHAIR, VICE CHAIR, AND DISTINGUISHED COMMITTEE MEMBERS. My 
name is Alan Johnson. I am the current chair of the Hawaii Substance Abuse Coalition 
(HSAC), a statewide organization for substance use disorder and co-occurring mental 
health disorder treatment and prevention agencies and recovery-oriented services. 
 
 
HSAC supports a 3-year pilot program the Kona division of the Third under the Big 
Island Drug Court for a gender responsive approach to women who are justice-
involved. 
 
Recovery can be complex because recovery involves a multitude of issues such as 
trauma, substance use disorder, mental illness, unhealthy relationships, domestic 
violence, sexual assault, and family law disputes. Courts can ensure a collaboration 
with multiple providers to implement evidenced-based behavioral health practices to 
support their full recovery and not return to incarceration.   
Formal substance abuse with mental illness treatment, 
such as residential and intensive outpatient, is still the 
most effective approach to achieve functionality and 
lasting recovery for justice-involved women.  
 
Substance use disorder coupled with mental health treatment is essential for 
offenders because it addresses the underlying issues that often contribute to criminal 
behavior and helps break the cycle of addiction and recidivism. Gender-responsive 
women’s courts are effective because they address the unique needs and challenges 
women face: 
 
1. Trauma-Informed Approach. Women’s courts often adopt trauma-
informed practices, ensuring that the court process is sensitive to the 

emotional, psychological, and physical impact of trauma on survivors. This 
fosters an environment where women feel safe, heard, and respected. 
  
2. High Rates of Substance Abuse Among Offenders: Many offenders 
struggle with substance use disorders. Studies show that a significant 
proportion of crimes, including theft, assault, and drug-related offenses, are 
committed under the influence of drugs or alcohol. 
 
3. Addresses Root Causes of Criminal Behavior: Substance abuse often 
coexists with mental health issues, trauma, or socioeconomic challenges. 
Treatment programs can provide a comprehensive approach to addressing 
these interconnected factors. Treating substance abuse can lower the 
likelihood of reoffending. Offenders who receive effective treatment are more 
likely to develop coping skills and lead crime-free lives after release. 
 
4. Specialized Training for Judges and Staff: Judges, attorneys, and court 
staff in women’s courts typically receive specialized training in gender 
dynamics, domestic violence, and trauma. This equips them to make 
informed, fair decisions and avoid perpetuating biases or re-traumatizing 
survivors. 
 
5. Integrated Social Services: Women’s courts often partner with social 
services, offering survivors access to counseling, housing assistance, legal aid, 
childcare, and job training. This holistic approach addresses the underlying 
issues that women face, helping them rebuild their lives. 
 
6. Empowering Women: By creating a supportive and understanding 
environment, women’s courts help survivors regain confidence, independence, 
and control over their lives, encouraging long-term recovery and stability 
while simultaneously holding perpetrators accountable while ensuring victim 
safety. 
 
This focused approach ensures that justice-involved women are given an opportunity 
to rebuild their lives, contributing positively to society rather than being trapped in 
cycles of crime and incarceration. 
 
We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony and are available for questions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMMUNITY ALLIANCE ON PRISONS 
P.O. Box 37158, Honolulu, HI 96837-0158 
Phone/E-Mail:  (808) 927-1214 / kat.caphi@gmail.com 
 
Today’s Inmate; Tomorrow’s Neighbor 
 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS 
Senator Donovan Dela Crus, Chair 
Senator Sharon Moriwaki, Vice Chair 
Monday, March 31, 2025 
Room 211 & VIDEOCONFERENCE 
10:02 AM 
 
STRONG SUPPORT FOR HB 727 HD1, SD1  – WOMEN’S COURT 
 
Aloha Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki and Members of the Committee! 
 
My name is Kat Brady and I am the Coordinator of Community Alliance on 
Prisons, a community initiative promoting smart justice policies in Hawai`i for more than 
two decades. This testimony is respectfully offered on behalf of the 3,767 Hawai`i 
individuals living behind bars1 and under the “care and custody” of the Department of 
Corrections and Rehabilitation as of March 24, 2025. We are always mindful that 936 
persons – 49.5% - of Hawai`i’s male prison population (1,890) are serving their sentences 
abroad -- thousands of miles away from their loved ones, their homes and, for the 
disproportionate number of incarcerated Kanaka Maoli, far, far from their ancestral 
lands. 
 
In Hawai`i nei, women comprise  11% of the entire jail  and prison 
population with 99 women in our 4 jails and 303 women at WCCC.  
 
Mahalo for the opportunity to show our strong support for HB 727 HD1, SD1 that 
makes permanent, the Mohala Wahine Women’s Court Project in the First Circuit and 
establishes a three—year Women's Court Pilot Program in the circuit court of the Kona 
division of the Third Circuit under the supervision of the Big Island Drug Court and 
requiring a report to the legislature. 
 
The Women’s Court in the First Circuit acknowledges that women’s pathways to 
incarceration are different and need gender responsive programs to address the many 
issues they have experienced in their journeys thus far. We are, therefore, happy to see 
trauma-informed care and gender-responsivity being the focus for this court. 
 
 
1 DCR Weekly Population Report, March 24, 2025 
https://dcr.hawaii.gov/wp-content/uploads/2025/03/Pop-Reports-Weekly-2025-03-24.pdf 
 

Judge Kim from Hawai`i Island has been at hearings helping O`ahu legislators 
understand the resource challenges of our neighbor islands. We know we don’t have 
enough programs and services on O`ahu; this is magnified on our outer islands.  
 
Community Alliance on Prisons commends Judge Kim for his belief that we can 
do more and his willingness to find ways to better serve the people on our outer islands!  
Imua, Judge Kim! 
 
We hope that WAM funds this important effort and that Hawai`i will substantially 
reduce our current population of incarcerated women. This will help our communities 
and families. WE CAN DO THIS! 
 
 
Mahalo nui! 
 

HB-727-SD-1 
Submitted on: 3/31/2025 7:37:09 AM 
Testimony for WAM on 3/31/2025 10:02:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Lydia Leanos 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I am strongly in support of HB 727, Women's Court Pilot Program. I feel that this type of court 
program is a strong step towards a trauma informed system that support members of our 
community that need supports towards reintegration into society and a court system that views 
people as people, not just criminals. The women's court program has the potential to see people 
as what has happened to them, not what is wrong with them, which is a framework that moves 
our entire judicial system towards restorative justice and not just further incarceration. Like the 
Juvenile Girls Court program, which is a successful model of treatment and intervention, I am in 
favor of HB 727 and a Women's court Program for the women of Hawaii.  
 
 	
