WRITTEN TESTIMONY OF 
THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL 
KA ‘OIHANA O KA LOIO KUHINA 
THIRTY-THIRD LEGISLATURE, 2025 
 
 
ON THE FOLLOWING MEASURE: 
H.B. NO. 1483, H.D. 1, S.D. 1, RELATING TO FIREWORKS. 
 
BEFORE THE: 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS 
 
DATE: 
Friday, April 4, 2025 
TIME:  10:46 a.m. 
LOCATION: State Capitol, Room 211 
TESTIFIER(S): 
WRITTEN TESTIMONY ONLY. 
(For more information, contact Tricia M. Nakamatsu, 
 Deputy Attorney General, at 808-586-1500) 
 
 
Chair Dela Cruz and Members of the Committee: 
The Department of the Attorney General (Department) strongly supports this bill.  
The Department also recommends amendments at the end of this testimony. 
The purpose of this bill is to facilitate more effective enforcement of Hawaii’s 
fireworks control laws, by: (1) amending definitions for fireworks offenses to reflect more 
common-sense standards; (2) strengthening and clarifying existing criminal fireworks 
offenses; (3) establishing new fireworks offenses; (4) establishing heightened penalties 
for repeat offenders and fireworks offenses that result in substantial or serious bodily 
injury or death; and (5) establishing non-criminal fireworks infractions for the lowest-
level offenses. 
Criminal statutes serve as a deterrent to illegal activity when they are effectively 
enforced and prosecuted.  For many years, however, Hawaii’s laws regarding illicit 
fireworks have made it difficult for state and county agencies to enforce or prosecute 
these types of cases.  When asked, prosecutors have repeatedly cited challenges 
posed by "gathering evidence and meeting the high burden of proof necessary for 
convictions",1 as well as "stringent definitions [in statute, that] . . . routinely create 
 
1 See Legislative Reference Bureau of Hawaii, Blast From the Past: An Update to the 
Report of the Illegal Fireworks Task Force to the Legislature for the Regular Session of 
2011 at 13, 14 (December 2019) https://lrb.hawaii.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2019_BlastFromThePast.pdf (last visited January 20, 2025). 

Testimony of the Department of the Attorney General 
Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 
Page 2 of 7 
 
roadblocks to effective prosecution."2  Thus, only a small number of criminal fireworks 
cases have been initiated by law enforcement, and an even smaller number have been 
prosecuted, resulting in a largely "ineffective deterrent" to the distribution and use of 
illicit fireworks. 
This bill addresses concerns raised by prosecutors and provides clarity and 
efficiency for law enforcement, prosecutors, and courts that handle these cases. 
DEFINITIONS 
This bill’s proposed amendments to definitions for "aerial device," "consumer 
fireworks," and “fireworks,” under section 132D-2, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) (page 
16, line 4, to page 18, line 15, and page 19, line 12, to page 20, line 8), present a 
straightforward, common-sense standard that could arguably be established through 
laypeople’s observations and testimony, in many cases, without requiring the 
presentation of any physical evidence or expert witnesses. 
Currently, proving beyond a reasonable doubt that an item meets the definition of 
an "aerial device," "consumer fireworks," or "fireworks," under section 132D-2, HRS, 
can be difficult, and may require expert testimony regarding the aeronautical design of 
the item, pyrotechnic design of the item, and comparison to federal definitions.  
Fireworks cases may also be difficult to prove when the illicit fireworks have already 
exploded and are unrecoverable.  The proposed definition of aerial fireworks takes into 
account that virtually every adult in Hawaii already "knows" what aerial fireworks are 
and could positively identify one rising up into the sky, based on their own observations, 
without the assistance of forensic testing or expert witnesses. 
STRENGTHENING AND CLARIFYING EXISTING CRIMINAL OFFENSES 
This bill amends existing criminal fireworks offenses to include wording and 
standards that are more amenable to prosecution, and penalties that are more 
proportionate to the prohibited acts. 
Currently, section 132D-5, HRS, groups a number of very dangerous acts, such 
as throwing ignited fireworks from or into a vehicle, together with much less serious 
acts, such as setting off consumer fireworks with a permit but outside of the permitted 
 
2 Id, at 14. 

Testimony of the Department of the Attorney General 
Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 
Page 3 of 7 
 
times, and classifies all of these offenses as a violation, with no possible jail time and 
only a potential fine of up to $5,000.  This bill separates out the various acts based on 
the level of dangerousness and place them under standalone offenses (i.e., "Consumer 
fireworks prohibitions" on page 10, line 16, to page 12, line 11; "Removal or extraction 
of pyrotechnic contents; prohibited" on page 10, lines 11-15; "General fireworks or 
articles pyrotechnic prohibitions in the second degree" on page 4, line 8, to page 7, line 
11; and “General fireworks or articles pyrotechnic prohibitions in the first degree" on 
page 21, line 12, to page 24, line 7).  Penalties for these standalone offenses range 
from an infraction carrying only a $200 fine, to class C felonies facing up to a $10,000 
fine and/or up to five years imprisonment. 
To support effective prosecution, two of the standalone offenses proposed 
provide strict liability for certain elements of the offense.  These include strict liability for: 
(1) an offender’s distance from sensitive areas, such as a hospital, when setting off an 
aerial device, display fireworks, or articles pyrotechnic, in violation of "General fireworks 
or articles pyrotechnic prohibitions in the second degree" (page 4, line 8 to  page 7, line 
11); and (2) an offender’s knowledge of the date or time, when buying consumer 
fireworks outside of the permitted dates or times, in violation of "Consumer fireworks 
prohibitions" (page 11, line 16, to page 12, line 11).  Requiring prosecutors to prove an 
offender was aware of such a distance, or aware of the date and time, when committing 
these types of offenses, seems unreasonable and may provide an easy way for 
offenders to avoid prosecution.  The Department believes it is reasonable to hold people 
to a certain level of responsibility if they choose to participate in these types of activities. 
ESTABLISHING NEW OFFENSES 
Given heightened concerns over illicit fireworks or articles pyrotechnic being 
transported in airplanes, this bill establishes such activity as a new standalone offense, 
as a class C felony ("Sending or receiving fireworks or articles pyrotechnic by air 
delivery; prohibited," on page 7, line 12 to page 8, line 18). 
Also, given the creation of fireworks infractions, discussed further below, a new 
standalone offense for "Refusal to provide identification" is established on page 12, line 
12, to page 13, line 4, based on similar wording found in section 291C-172, HRS.  It 
provides law enforcement and courts with some level of assurance that offenders who 

Testimony of the Department of the Attorney General 
Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 
Page 4 of 7 
 
are issued fireworks infractions provide their actual name and mailing address for the 
citation.  This information is necessary for courts to process the citations, particularly if 
the person fails to respond to the citation (i.e., pay the fine, write to the court, or request 
a hearing). 
As mentioned above, section 132D-5, HRS, "General fireworks or articles 
pyrotechnic prohibitions in the first degree," currently prohibits "throw[ing], catapult[ing], 
or otherwise manually propel[ling] any ignited consumer fireworks, aerial devices, 
display fireworks, or articles pyrotechnic" under certain circumstances, and that 
prohibition remains under section 132D-5, HRS, in this bill (page 21, line 12, to page 24, 
line 7).  To ensure that throwing, catapulting, or otherwise manually propelling ignited 
fireworks or articles pyrotechnic is prohibited, this bill establishes these acts as an 
additional offense under section 132D-A(a)(2), HRS, "General fireworks or articles 
pyrotechnic prohibitions in the second degree" (page 5, lines 13-15).  Finally, additional 
reporting requirements are established for any carrier or person shipping controlled 
fireworks or articles pyrotechnic into Hawaii, or interisland, on page 13, line 5, to page 
14, line 15. 
ESTABLISHING HEIGHTENED PENALTIES UNDER CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES 
In addition to the usual penalty for any given offense, certain offenses3 could be 
subject to enhanced penalties if the offender was previously convicted of a crime under 
chapter 132D, HRS, within ten years prior to the new offense, or if any of the illicit 
fireworks or articles pyrotechnic causes substantial bodily injury, serious bodily injury, or 
death to another person.  Whatever the usual level of offense, this enhanced penalty 
could increase the level of offense by one or two grades.  The offense of distributing 
aerial devices without a permit would normally be a class C felony (i.e., up to five years 
imprisonment and/or up to a $10,000 fine), but it becomes a class B felony (i.e., up to 
 
3 "General fireworks or articles pyrotechnic prohibitions in the second degree" on page 
4, line 8, to page 7, line 11; "Distributing fireworks and articles pyrotechnic to non-permit 
holder" on page 8, line 19, to page 10, line 10; “General fireworks or articles pyrotechnic 
prohibitions in the first degree" on page 21, line 12, to page 24, line 7; "Liability of 
parents or guardians" on page 31, line 19, to page 33, line 17; all offenses covered by 
section 132D-14, on page 33, line 20, to page 40, line 11; and "Liability of homeowner, 
renter, or person otherwise responsible for real property" on page 40, line 14, to page 
43, line 6. 

Testimony of the Department of the Attorney General 
Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 
Page 5 of 7 
 
ten years imprisonment and/or up to a $25,000 fine) if the offender had a prior 
fireworks-related conviction in the past ten years, or if the illicit fireworks caused 
substantial bodily injury to anyone; and it becomes a class A felony (i.e., up to twenty 
years imprisonment and/or up to a $50,000 fine) if the illicit fireworks caused serious 
bodily injury or death. 
For nearly all of these enhanced penalties, the offender would be held strictly 
liable with respect to any knowledge that the illicit fireworks would cause such injuries or 
death.  In other words, it would not be a defense to prosecution if offenders claim they 
had no reason to know the illicit fireworks would cause such injuries or death.  For 
"General fireworks or articles pyrotechnic prohibitions in the first degree" on page 21, 
line 12, to page 24, line 7, offenders would be held to a negligent state of mind for this 
type of enhanced sentencing, meaning prosecutors would only have to show that 
offenders should have been aware that there was a substantial and unjustifiable risk 
their actions could cause injuries or death. 
Aside from the offenses noted above, other offenses4 could be subject to 
enhanced penalties if the offender was convicted of a crime under chapter 132D, HRS, 
within ten years prior to the new offense, or if the illicit fireworks or articles pyrotechnic 
were over a certain weight. 
The level of offense charged for purchasing, possessing, setting off, igniting, or 
discharging controlled fireworks or articles pyrotechnic without a permit would be based 
on weight, as shown on page 34, line 12, to page 35, line 20, with fifty pounds or more 
of illicit fireworks being a class B felony.  Enhanced sentencing for repeat offenders, or 
causing substantial or serious bodily injury or death, would also apply. 
ESTABLISHING NON-CRIMINAL FIREWORKS INFRACTIONS 
While much of the bill addresses high-level offenses, such as importing or 
distributing large amounts of illicit fireworks, or incidents that result in serious injury or 
death, the bill also establishes penalties for fireworks infractions in section 132D-
 
4 "Sending or receiving fireworks or articles pyrotechnic by air delivery; prohibited" on 
page 7, line 12, to page 8, line 18; and "Importing, storing, or distributing controlled 
fireworks or articles pyrotechnic without a license" on page 33, line 20, to page 40, line 
11; and "Liability of homeowner, renter, or person otherwise responsible for real 
property" on page 40, line 14, to page 43, line 6. 

Testimony of the Department of the Attorney General 
Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 
Page 6 of 7 
 
14(a)(2)(D), HRS, on page 35, lines 16-20, with non-criminal penalties for purchasing, 
possessing, or setting off small amounts of illicit aerial devices, display fireworks, or 
articles pyrotechnic.  While it may seem counterintuitive to eliminate jail as a penalty for 
these types of offenses, the Department believes this would allow law enforcement 
agencies and courts to hold a much higher number of individuals accountable for their 
use of illicit fireworks quickly and safely and thus make more efficient use of limited 
resources at certain critical times of the year. 
Similar to the way non-criminal traffic citations are issued now, a law 
enforcement officer could issue multiple fireworks citations without having to spend 
additional time interviewing witnesses, collecting evidence, or writing police reports, all 
of which may be necessary when trying to build a criminal case.  Due to the lower 
standard of proof for fireworks infractions, these citations could be issued very quickly 
and easily, without requiring any further investigation, and then the officer could move 
on to continue patrolling the community or addressing other calls. 
Once a fireworks citation is issued, the recipient may then pay the fine, mail-in an 
explanation to the court, or request a live hearing before a judge, similar to a traffic 
infraction.  In this version of the bill, the notices of infraction and the adjudications 
process would be controlled by chapter 291D, HRS, with various sections of chapter 
291D amended in bill sections 18 to 29, to include fireworks infractions, on page 48, line 
11, to page 83, line 10.  The bill establishes a $300 fine for purchasing, possessing, or 
setting off less than five pounds of illicit aerial devices, display fireworks, or articles 
pyrotechnic (or if the weight is undeterminable, possibly because it exploded), in section 
132D-14(a)(2)(D) on page 35, lines 16-20. 
Consumer fireworks prohibitions are also designated as infractions, in new 
section 132D-E on page 10, line 16, to page 12, line 11, as are violations of the new 
section 132D-G (Requirements of Carrier) on page 13, line 5, to page 14, line 15. 
SUGGESTED AMENDMENTS 
The Department recommends adding a new chapter to Title 38 of the HRS, to 
address the notices of infraction and adjudications process for all fireworks infractions, 
as done in prior versions of this bill (see section 2 of H.B. No. 1483, or H.B. No. 1483, 
H.D. 1).  These types of infractions—and any non-traffic-related infractions that the 

Testimony of the Department of the Attorney General 
Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 
Page 7 of 7 
 
Legislature may choose to establish in the future—are not appropriately placed under 
Title 17 of the HRS, entitled, "Motor and Other Vehicles."  All chapters under Title 17, 
HRS, pertain to motor vehicles or other types of vehicles. 
While we are unaware of any statute or rule that prohibits placement of statutes 
(or portions of statutes) under a title of the HRS unrelated to that title’s subject matter; 
the Hawaii Legislative Drafting Manual (2022) (Drafting Manual) notes that, "[t]he 
Hawaii Revised Statutes is organized by broad subject matter areas into a series of 
chapters [and] . . . groups of sections within a chapter may be organized into a 
"part" . . . " (page 35, Drafting Manual, emphasis added).5 Also, on page 132, the 
Drafting Manual states, "laws considered to be of a general and permanent nature are 
organized by general subject area and codified as the Hawaii Revised Statutes" 
(emphasis added).  Placing related chapters and statutes within the titles of the HRS 
that pertain to the subject matter, is a logical organizational structure that is easier for 
practitioners and the public to understand. 
If the Legislature still chooses to add fireworks infractions to chapter 291D, HRS, 
the Department recommends the following amendments: 
• Amend page 14, line 13, to fill in the blank and reference "chapter 291D." 
• Amend the definition of "fireworks infraction" to account for petty misdemeanors 
and violations, on page 51, line 20, as follows (underscoring removed from new 
material in bill, to Ramseyer additional changes): " . . . that is not explicitly 
classified as a felony [or], misdemeanor, petty misdemeanor, or violation,"  This 
will ensure the penalties described under section 132D-14.5(a)(1), "Liability of 
homeowner, renter, or person otherwise responsible for real property" (page 40, 
line 14, to page 41, line 5), and section 132D-14(e) (page 38, lines 1-7), cannot 
be classified as fireworks infractions. 
The Department respectfully requests the passage of this important bill with the 
recommended amendment.  Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this bill. 
 
5 Available online at https://lrb.hawaii.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2022_HawaiiLegislativeDraftingManual.pdf; last accessed April 2, 
2025. 

HONOLULU POLICE DEPARTMENT
KA ‘O/HANA MAKA‘I O HONOLULU
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU
801 SOUTH BERETANIA STREET ' HONOLULU, HAWA|'l 96813
TELEPHONE: (808) 529-3111 ' WEBSITE: www.h0no|uIuQd.0rg
nick 3k¢r(i)<;|Ano|
ARTHUR J. LOGAN
MEIA
_
_
KA Hg/Hiﬁkn '1
'-.3 '._\
If
DEPUTY cmsrs
HOPE LUNA NUI MAKA I
v—}ﬁq?
oun nsmsnswcs RP-PA
April 4, 2025
The Honorable Donovan M. Dela Cruz, Chair
and Members
Committee on Ways and Means
State Senate
415 South Beretania Street, Room 211
Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96813
Dear Chair Dela Cruz and Members:
SUBJECT: House Bill No. 1483, H.D. 1, S.D. 1, Relating to Fireworks
l am Major Randall Platt of District 4 (Kailua/Kane‘ohe/Kahuku) of the Honolulu
Police Department (HPD), City and County of Honolulu.
The HPD supports House Bill No. 1483, H.D. 1, S.D. 1, Relating to Fireworks.
The HPD supports this bill which seeks to clarify the definitions of fireworks and
improve enforcement.
The HPD also believes that better enforcement of the fireworks control laws is
essential not only to safeguard property from preventable fire damage but also to protect
the community from injuries related to fires and explosions, respiratory issues caused by air
pollution, and ongoing trauma experienced by individuals due to loud explosions.
The HPD urges you to support House Bill No. 1483, H.D. 1, S.D. 1, Relating to
Fireworks.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
APPROVED:
Sincerely,
< 
14,!
P/94
E-
Arthur J. Lo
n
T
Randall Platt, Major
Chief of
olice
District4
Serving With Integrity, Respect, Fairness, and the Aloha Spirit

Managmg Director
-
I
' "
l¢
-.
Mayor
4- E.
Police Chief
I
C Klmo A]ameda,ph_])_
*
B€Il_]3IIllllT Moszkowicz
J
'-.
.-' .-'
Wllham V Brilhante Jr.
""""""
Reed K Mahuna
Depuijy Police Chief
N ﬂu
I
Ida
County of Haw
POLICE DEPARTMENT
349 Kapi‘olaniStreet - Hilo,Hawai‘i 96720-3993
(808) 935-3311
0 Fax (808) 961-2389
April 3, 2025
Senator Donovan M. Dela Cruz, Chair
Senator Sharon Y. Moriwaki, Vice Chair
And Members
Committee on Ways and Means
State Capitol
415 South Beretania Street
Honolulu, HI 96813
Dear Senators Dela Cruz and Moriwaki,
RE:
HOUSE BILL 1483, HD1, SD1 RELATING TO FIREWORKS
DATE APRIL 4, 2025
TIME: 10:46 A.M.
Pl_ACE: CONFERENCE ROOM 211 & VIDEOCONFERENCE
The Hawaii County Police Department (HPD) respectfully submits testimony in support
of House Bill No. 1483 HD1, SD1 Relating to Fireworks.
Strengthening laws that aim to curb the use of unpermitted, illegal ﬁreworks is critical to
protecting public safety. This Bill would establish an adjudication system and procedures
to process ﬁreworks infractions and amend deﬁnitions and penalties for ﬁreworks
offenses, including heightened penalties if another person suffers substantial or serious
bodily injury or death as a result of the ﬁreworks offenses.
HPD is also grateful to see
that the Bill includes monetary appropriation, in amounts yet to be determined, to carry
out the purposes of the Bill.
HPD urges the committees to support House Bill 1483, HD1, SD1.
Respectfully,
&n/
SHERR
D. BIRD
ACTING POLICE CHIEF
“Hawai’i County is an Equal Opportunity Provider and Employer”
r

  RICHARD T. BISSEN, JR. 
Mayor 
 
ANDREW H. MARTIN 
Prosecuting Attorney 
 
SHELLY C. MIYASHIRO 
First Deputy Prosecuting Attorney 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE PROSECUTING ATTORNEY 
COUNTY OF MAUI 
200 SOUTH HIGH STREET 
WAILUKU, MAUI, HAWAI’I  96793 
           PHONE (808) 270-7777  •  FAX (808) 270-7625 
 
TESTIMONY ON 
H.B. 1483 HD1 SD1  
RELATING TO FIREWORKS 
 
April 3, 2025 
 
 
 
 
The Honorable Donovan M. Dela Cruz 
Chair 
The Honorable Sharon Y. Moriwaki 
Vice Chair 
and Members of the Committee on Ways and Means 
 
Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki, and Members of the Committees: 
 
The Department of the Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui respectfully submits the 
following comments in support of H.B. 1483 HD1 SD1, Relating to Fireworks. This bill 
amends multiple definitions and penalties for fireworks offenses, as well as creates a fireworks 
infraction adjudication system and new fireworks offenses.  
 
The Department of the Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui supports this bill because it 
would help protect our community from the yearly effects of illegal fireworks, such as fire- and 
explosion-related property damage and injuries, respiratory distress stemming from fireworks 
smoke and annual trauma to humans and animals stemming from loud fireworks explosions. We 
would note that videos depicting staggering amounts of illegal fireworks being set off every New 
Year’s Eve are readily viewable online and illustrate the inadequacy of our current laws. In our 
view, H.B. 1483 HD1 SD1’s increased penalties and proposed fireworks infraction adjudication 
process would go a long way to deterring the sale, purchase and use of illegal fireworks, as well 
as ensuring that people who willfully disobey the law are held accountable to an appropriate 
degree for their actions.   
 
For these reasons, the Department of the Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui supports 
H.B. 1483 HD1 SD1.  Please feel free to contact our office at (808) 270-7777 if you have any 
questions or inquiries.  Thank you very much for the opportunity to provide testimony on this 
bill. this bill. 
 	

 
Hawaii Explosives & Pyrotechnics, Inc. 
P.O. Box 1244 
Keaau, HI 96749-1244 
hepinc@hipyro.com 
(808) 968-0600 
 
 
April 2, 2025 
 
Senator Donvan Dela Cruz, Chair 
Committee on Ways and Means 
Hawaii State Senate 
State Capitol, Conference Room 211 
Honolulu, HI 96813 
 
Re: House Bill 1483 HD1 SD1, Relating to Fireworks 
 
Dear Chair Dela Cruz and members of the committee, 
 
As a licensed professional fireworks display company, we are in support of legislation that seeks to improve 
enforcement of fireworks control laws and protects the community from the unpermitted and inappropriate 
use of fireworks designed for professional use within the community. We are pleased that the Attorney 
General’s Office and committee members have been receptive to our concerns with the bill and are willing to 
make amendments that ensure the statute doesn’t adversely affect permitted commercial displays. However, 
there are still sections of the proposed legislation that are problematic for licensed display production 
companies. 
 
In section 2 of the bill, on pages 7, line 12 through page 8, line 13, HB 1483 adds section 132D-B, “Sending or 
receiving fireworks or articles pyrotechnic by air delivery; prohibited.” Pyrotechnics that are classified under 
the USDOT 49 CFR as Articles Pyrotechnic, UN0431 and UN0432 can be shipped via air as long as they are 
properly packaged, labeled and declared on the shipping papers. Indeed, most theatrical pyrotechnic effects 
used for concerts, plays, sporting events, movie and television productions, and similar performances 
throughout the United States are shipped via air transport. Prohibiting the importation of small, 
production-sized quantities for these productions via regulated air transport would actually lead to the need 
to stockpile large quantities of devices to serve the needs of these productions. Since the transportation of 
hazardous materials is already regulated by the USDOT, and substantial penalties are imposed for the 
improper declaration or packaging of these items, our suggestion would be to eliminate 132D-B from the bill 
as it is redundant, and the requirement is already established in 132D-8.6. 
 
On pages 38, line 17 through page 40, line 6, HB 1483 adds section 132D-G, “Requirements of Carrier.” This 
section adds requirements for the carrier to notify the “appropriate county official and designated state law 
enforcement agencies” when shipping pyrotechnic devices. It is our opinion that it should be the 
responsibility of the shipper to send notification to the relevant State authorities as they are the entity 
tasked with initiating the transport. In cases where the shipper is an entity who resides outside the State of 
Hawaii, and jurisdiction is limited, the responsibility should fall to the recipient and/or consignee to carry out 
notification. As stated earlier, it is the responsibility of the Shipper under federal law to properly package, 
label and document any shipment of hazardous material, It is the responsibility of the Carrier to reject any 

 
hazardous material that is not properly packaged, labeled and documented. Since, in our opinion, most 
of the illicit fireworks found on the street are arriving into the State undeclared, this section does little to 
address the problem. It is our suggestion that section 132-G be eliminated.  
 
In section 9 of the bill, pages 30, line 11 through page 31, line 4, item (b) adds“Each person may purchase a 
maximum of fifty permits per year…”As the leading display production company in the state, our firm 
produces over 100 licensed displays per year. Enacting a limit on the number of permits we could legally 
receive would be seriously detrimental to our business. We respectfully suggest the limit on permits be 
limited to firecracker permits. 
 
Thank you for your careful consideration of these amendments. As a duly licensed, commercial fireworks 
display company we are supportive of measures that promote the safe use of fireworks designed for 
professionals by properly trained personnel under a comprehensive permit process, and the use of fireworks 
by consumers in a safe and responsible manner.  We are always happy to answer any questions you may 
have related to this issue. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Hawaii Explosives & Pyrotechnics, Inc. 
(808)968-0600 
hepinc@hipyro.com 

Mōʻiliʻili Campus 
2700 Waiʻalae Avenue 
Honolulu, HI 96826 
Kosasa Family Campus at Hoʻopili 
91-1945 Fort Weaver Road 
ʻEwa Beach, HI 96706 
(808) 356-2200 | HawaiianHumane.org 
The Hawaiian Humane Society is dedicated to promoting the human-
animal bond and the humane treatment of all animals. 
 
 
 
Date: 
April 2, 2025 
 
To:  
Chair Sen. Donovan M. Dela Cruz 
 
Vice Chair Sen. Sharon Y. Moriwaki, 
and Members of the Committee on Ways and Means 
 
Submitted By: Stephanie Kendrick, Director of Community Engagement 
 
Hawaiian Humane Society, 808-356-2217  
 
RE: 
 Testimony in support of HB 1483, HD1, SD1: Relating to Fireworks 
 
Friday, April 4, 2025, 10:46 a.m., Room 211 & Videoconference 
 
 
On behalf of the Hawaiian Humane Society, thank you for considering our support for 
House Bill 1483, HD1, SD1, which establishes an adjudication system and procedures to 
process fireworks infractions; amends multiple definitions and penalties for fireworks 
offenses, including heightened penalties if another person suffers substantial bodily 
injury, serious bodily injury, or death as a result of the fireworks offenses; establishes 
various criminal offenses and penalties related to fireworks or articles pyrotechnics; 
and appropriates funds.  
Hawaiian Humane supports any attempt to restrict fireworks from residential 
neighborhoods. Despite tragic deaths and injuries spanning many years - and reaching 
a new level of horror on Oʻahu this year - the crime of using illegal fireworks is rarely 
punished. This comprehensive measure aims to increase enforcement against 
fireworks infractions by creating a new system of adjudication and new penalties to 
address the current failures of our legal system. 
These bombs increasingly go off without regard to date and terrorize pets and people 
alike. The unpredictable barrage makes it impossible to prepare and creates sustained 
stress, which can do lasting damage to emotional, mental and physical health.  
Please pass HB1483, HD1, SD1, and hold the perpetrators of these crimes accountable. 
Mahalo for your consideration. 

HB-1483-SD-1 
Submitted on: 4/2/2025 9:21:57 PM 
Testimony for WAM on 4/4/2025 10:46:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
lynne matusow 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Hopefully, this will be another efficient tool in the toolbox to punish those who commit 
fireworks infractions. Enough is enough already, with people and pets killed, injured, houses 
burned, and emergency responders overtaxed. It is time to stop talking and start acting. The 
excuse that fireworks are cultural does not cut it any longer. The harm greatly outweighs culture. 
All fireworks should be provided by licensed organizations. 
 

HB-1483-SD-1 
Submitted on: 4/3/2025 3:10:54 PM 
Testimony for WAM on 4/4/2025 10:46:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
B.A. McClintock 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Please support this important bill. Mahalo.  
 

HB-1483-SD-1 
Submitted on: 4/3/2025 3:49:39 PM 
Testimony for WAM on 4/4/2025 10:46:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Beverly Heiser 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki, and Committee Members, 
I STRONGLY SUPPORT HB 1483, HD1, SD1. 
There are so many who believe that change will not happen, even after the Aliamanu incident. 
The lack of passing enforceable laws year after year have created this belief, that I hope does not 
hold true this year. Minor fireworks incidents are not always reported to show the danger of 
illegal fireworks. This past New Year’s Eve, a vlog posted by a student who moved to Laie to 
attend college, got hit by a firework nearly missing his eye. If it had hit about a quarter inch 
closer, he could have been blind. He was just walking in the streets taking video of the fireworks. 
He ended up in the Kahuku emergency room for treatment. To see the vlog and his comments, 
search “Tyson’s Wilderness, New Year’s in Hawaiʻi Gone Wrong”.  
After a slight decrease in illegal fireworks in 2023, thanks to the Illegal Fireworks Task Force 
making several large seizures at the docks, there was a significant increase in 2024. Bills pending 
this year that would establish a Fireworks Enforcement Division or increase personnel and 
provide what the Illegal Fireworks Task Force needs should address the problem if passed.  
The Task Force has been doing an excellent job, but other current laws have proved weak, does 
not provide deterrence, are difficult to enforce and virtually almost impossible to prosecute. 
Having individuals take videos, risking retaliation, assaults, and getting injured from fireworks, 
have proved useless because once fireworks explodes there is no evidence, and many are not 
willing to testify. It was mentioned that one of the main roadblocks to enforce and prosecute 
illegal fireworks was the way these type of fireworks were defined.  
HB 1483 HD1, SD1 provides an excellent solution by amending definitions and penalties for 
fireworks offenses, and implementing a dedicated adjudication system for fireworks infractions 
similar to traffic infractions. This will make it easier for officers to increase enforcement of end-
use violators and make it easier and faster to adjudicate cases in a district or family court.  An 
exorbitant amount is spent on fireworks, so hopefully fines will be hefty enough and escalate as 
needed until a point of deterrence is achieved. Slowing the flow of illegal fireworks entering the 
islands, together with an adjudication system will add to effectiveness. 
In the area where I live, aerials were most prominent this past New Year’s Eve. These aerials 
come not from a nearby neighbor, but travel from a street or two over. What I found most 
 	

disturbing when cleaning up the mess is the use of more plastics. When these tubes explode parts 
of it shatters, scattering small sharp pieces of plastic in the grass. The goal is to reduce plastics, 
but aerials that have no useful purpose scatter it everywhere. It takes patience each year cleaning 
up debris that we were not responsible for. It’s troubling for people who have to pay for damages 
caused by illegal fireworks because there is no evidence and proof who did it.  A post this past 
New Year’s Eve showed a gaping hole in a Waipahu roof where debris landed on furniture and 
the floor. We cringe when we hear  an aerial hit our roof. My neighbor has a nice garden and 
plants vegetables to eat. This past New Year’s Eve she actually covered what she could of her 
garden so firework chemicals and debris would not contaminate her plants and soil.You would 
think the Aliamanu incident would make people think twice, but I still hear illegal fireworks 
every now and then.  
There was another recent incident on 1/28/25 where a 27 year-old woman sustained serious 
multiple shrapnel injuries after igniting fireworks.  
Please provide full support for HB 1483, HD1, SD1. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
 

HB-1483-SD-1 
Submitted on: 4/3/2025 8:56:03 PM 
Testimony for WAM on 4/4/2025 10:46:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Jessica Braun 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Testimony 2 
Jessica Braun 
04/04/2025 
HB 1483 
Hello legislatures, 
My name is Jessica Braun. I am a student, a social worker, and a member of this 
community. I am writing to you today in support of implementing and enforcing a stronger 
penalty for the use of fireworks. Although fireworks are used as a symbol of celebration, 
our community has experienced first-hand how they can endanger and cause life-changing 
harm to individuals in our community. Firework are also known to be leaders in starting 
for major fires causing property damage, loss and harm to the health of our enviorment. 
The sound from fireworks also signaficantly affects our young child, pets, individuals with 
PTSD, veterans, and trauma survivors who experience anxiety due to sudden, excess, and 
loud explosive noise.  
As a mental health worker, my main concerns are focused on fireworks fatalities and thier 
harm to indidual who have experienced trauma related to their loud sounds, sounds similar 
to gun shots, sudden bright flash, and unexpected burst. Unfortunately fireworks can lead 
to harm, injuery and even death on indivduals especially when being used improperty or in 
set off in improper spaces. Every year, fireworks-related accidents cause a significant 
number of fatalities and injuries, including burns, traumatic injuries, and even fatalities 
from explosions.  
Lastly, unauthorized fireworks place a heavy burden on emergency responders, diverting 
resources away from critical situations. By enforcing penalties, we can reduce the strain on 
firefighters, paramedics, and police officers who must respond to firework-related 
incidents. 
Strengthening penalties will serve as a deterrent and help to reduce these preventable 
tragedies. Your consideration of these matters and solutions is very much appreciated. 
 	

Thank you for your time. 
Jessica Braun, Honolulu, HI. 
 

HB-1483-SD-1 
Submitted on: 4/3/2025 9:02:12 PM 
Testimony for WAM on 4/4/2025 10:46:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Michael A. Cobb Jr 
Individual 
Oppose 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I oppose this bill. We have a strict process for legal fireworks. We have eliminated sparklers. 
The illegal fireworks will continue to be a problem since sparklers are gone. We have enough 
laws. This is not needed. 
 
 	
