TESTIMONY OF 
THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL 
KA ‘OIHANA O KA LOIO KUHINA 
THIRTY-THIRD LEGISLATURE, 2025 
 
 
ON THE FOLLOWING MEASURE: 
H.B. NO. 1483, H.D. 1, RELATING TO FIREWORKS. 
 
BEFORE THE: 
SENATE COMMITTEES ON PUBLIC SAFETY AND MILITARY AFFAIRS AND ON 
JUDICIARY 
 
DATE: 
Thursday, March 13, 2025 
TIME:  9:30 a.m. 
LOCATION: State Capitol, Room 016 
TESTIFIER(S): 
Anne E. Lopez, Attorney General, or  
Tricia M. Nakamatsu, Deputy Attorney General 
 
 
Chairs Elefante and Rhoads and Members of the Committees:
The Department of the Attorney General (Department) strongly supports this bill 
and offers the following comments and suggested amendments. 
The purpose of this bill is to facilitate more effective enforcement of Hawaii’s 
fireworks control laws, by: (1) amending definitions to reflect more common-sense 
standards; (2) strengthening and clarifying existing criminal offenses; (3) establishing 
new offenses; (4) establishing heightened penalties for repeat offenders and offenses 
that result in substantial or serious bodily injury or death; and (5) establishing non-
criminal fireworks infractions for the lowest-level offenses. 
Criminal statutes serve as a deterrent to illegal activity when they are effectively 
enforced and prosecuted.  For many years, however, Hawaii’s state laws regarding illicit 
fireworks have made it difficult for state and county agencies to enforce or prosecute 
these types of cases.  When asked, prosecutors have repeatedly cited challenges 
posed by "gathering evidence and meeting the high burden of proof necessary for 
convictions",1 as well as "stringent definitions [in statute, that] . . . routinely create 
 
1 See Legislative Reference Bureau of Hawaii, Blast From the Past: An Update to the 
Report of the Illegal Fireworks Task Force to the Legislature for the Regular Session of 
2011 at 13, 14 (December 2019) https://lrb.hawaii.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2019_BlastFromThePast.pdf (last visited January 20, 2025). 
1"
no
...--
H.
.1 Q ""
<°\
If‘
I
r _m___,,...
I-
‘-4,1,1,

Testimony of the Department of the Attorney General 
Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 
Page 2 of 4 
 
roadblocks to effective prosecution."2  Thus, only a small number of criminal fireworks 
cases have been initiated by law enforcement, and an even smaller number have been 
prosecuted, resulting in a largely "ineffective deterrent" to the distribution and use of 
illicit fireworks. 
This bill would largely address the concerns raised by prosecutors, and provide 
greater clarity and efficiency for law enforcement, prosecutors, and the courts that 
handle these cases. 
SUGGESTED AMENDMENTS 
The Department recommends the following amendments, to further clarify and 
correct various aspects of the fireworks control laws. 
Permit holders 
To ensure that anyone who holds a permit to use aerial devices, display 
fireworks, or articles pyrotechnic pursuant to sections 132D-10 and 132D-16, Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS), is able to continue using the permit for fireworks displays as 
intended, the Department recommends amending the wording in section 132D-A 
("General fireworks or articles pyrotechnic prohibitions in the second degree") on page 
30, lines 12-15, as follows (underscoring removed from new material in bill, to 
Ramseyer additional changes): 
(a)  A person commits the offense of general fireworks or articles 
pyrotechnic prohibitions in the second degree if the person without a 
permit issued pursuant to sections 132D-10 and 132D-16 intentionally, 
knowingly, or recklessly: . . . ." 
 
In separating out various offenses from the existing section 132D-5, HRS, and creating 
section 132D-A, similar wording was intentionally deleted from section 132D-5, HRS, as 
amended, but unintentionally omitted from section 132D-A. 
License holders 
To ensure that anyone licensed to purchase or distribute consumer fireworks at 
wholesale or retail pursuant to section 132D-7, HRS, is able to continue using the 
license as intended, the Department recommends amending the wording in section 
 
2 Id, at 14. 

Testimony of the Department of the Attorney General 
Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 
Page 3 of 4 
 
132D-E(a) and (b) ("Consumer fireworks prohibitions") on page 36, line 19, to page 37, 
line 14, as follows (underscoring removed from new material in bill, to Ramseyer 
additional changes): 
 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Purchase, possess, set off, ignite, discharge, or otherwise 
cause to explode any consumer fireworks without a permit 
required pursuant to section 132D-10; or 
(2)  Set off, ignite, discharge, or otherwise cause to explode any 
consumer fireworks at any time not within the periods for use 
prescribed in section 132D-3[.]; 
except that a person licensed pursuant to sections 132D-7 and 132D-8 
may purchase and possess consumer fireworks in accordance with the 
person's license. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a licensed 
wholesaler who is distributing consumer fireworks to a licensed retailer in 
accordance with the person’s license, to distribute consumer fireworks: 
(1)  More than five calendar days before the time periods for 
permissible use under section 132D-3; or 
(2)  After 12:01 a.m. on New Year's Day, 6:00 p.m. on Chinese 
New Year's Day, or 8:00 p.m. on the Fourth of July. 
 
These exceptions appear to have been an unintentional omission in the current 
fireworks control laws, as section 132D-5(b) and (c), HRS, does not expressly exempt 
such licensed activity.  The recommended wording is based on similar wording found in 
section 132D-8(d), HRS, regarding the lawful use of licenses. 
Conforming amendments 
The Department also recommends adding a new section to the bill, to amend 
section 132D-8, HRS, by amending subsections (b) and (d), to conform with the newly 
defined terms, "distribute" and "distribution," as follows: 
(b)  Each storage, wholesaling, and retailing site shall be required 
to obtain a separate license.  The license shall specify the date of 
issuance or effect and the date of expiration, which shall be March 31 of 
each year.  The application shall be made on a form setting forth the date 
upon which the storage[, sale, or offers for sale] or distribution are to 
begin, the address of the location of the licensee, and the name of the 
proprietor or, if a partnership, the name of the partnership and the names 
of all partners or, if a corporation, the name of the corporation and the 
names of its officers.  Any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be 
revoked by the county if the licensee violates any provision of this chapter 

Testimony of the Department of the Attorney General 
Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 
Page 4 of 4 
 
or if the licensee stores or handles the fireworks in a manner that presents 
an unreasonable safety hazard. 
* 
* 
* 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee, other than a licensed 
wholesaler who is [selling or transferring] distributing fireworks or articles 
pyrotechnic to a licensed retailer[,] pursuant to the person’s license, to 
[sell or offer to sell, exchange for consideration, give, transfer, or donate] 
distribute any fireworks or articles pyrotechnic at any time to any person 
who does not present a permit duly issued as required by [section] 
sections 132D-10 [or] and 132D-16.  The permit shall be signed by the 
seller or transferor at the time of [sale or transfer] distribution of the 
fireworks or articles pyrotechnic, and the seller or transferor at the time of 
[sale or transfer] distribution of the fireworks or articles pyrotechnic, and 
the seller or transferor shall indicate on the permit the amount and type of 
fireworks or articles pyrotechnic [sold or transferred.] distributed.  No 
person shall [sell or deliver] distribute fireworks to any permittee in any 
amount in excess of the amount specified in the permit, less the amount 
shown on the permit to have been previously purchased; provided that no 
fireworks shall be sold to a permittee holding a permit issued for purposes 
of section 132D-3, more than five calendar days before the applicable time 
period under section 132D-3. 
 
The recommended wording also includes technical clarifying amendments, by adding 
the words, "licensed" and "pursuant to the person’s license," and changing the word "or" 
to "and" (consistent with section 132D-8(e)). 
Inspectors 
The Department recommends amending the definition of "inspector" on page 72, 
line 8, by deleting the phrase, "any law enforcement officer or . . . "  The Department is 
unclear which law enforcement officers may be designated as administrative inspectors 
for purposes of section 132D-22, HRS, as amended, or under what circumstances, and 
respectfully requests additional time to discuss this further with other agencies. 
The Department strongly supports the passage of this bill with the recommended 
amendments.  Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this matter. 

 
 
JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR 
KE KIAʻĀINA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
LT GOVERNOR 
KE KEʻENA 
                
 
 
STATE OF HAWAIʻI  |  KA MOKUʻĀINA O HAWAIʻI 
           DEPARTMENT OF LAW ENFORCEMENT 
Ka ʻOihana Hoʻokō Kānāwai 
715 South King Street 
Honolulu, Hawaiʻi 96813 
 
 
 
                  MIKE LAMBERT 
DIRECTOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JARED K. REDULLA 
Deputy Director 
Law Enforcement 
 
 
 
 
"An Equal Opportunity Employer/Agency" 
TESTIMONY ON HOUSE BILL 1483, HOUSE DRAFT 1 
RELATING TO FIREWORKS 
Before the Senate Committee on 
PUBLIC SAFETY AND MILITARY AFFAIRS 
JUDICIARY 
Thursday, March 13, 2025, 9:30 AM 
State Capitol Conference Room 016 & Videoconference 
Testifiers: Mike Lambert 
 
Chairs Elefante, Rhoads, Vice Chairs Wakai, Gabbard, and members of the Committee: 
 
The Department of Law Enforcement (DLE) supports House Bill 1483, House Draft 1. 
This bill establishes a comprehensive adjudication system and procedures for 
processing fireworks infractions in Hawaii, while also amending definitions and 
enhancing penalties for fireworks offenses. Notably, the bill implements heightened 
penalties in cases where fireworks offenses result in substantial bodily injury, serious 
bodily injury, or death to another person. The legislation also establishes various 
criminal offenses and penalties related to fireworks and articles pyrotechnics, providing 
a more robust framework for enforcement. 
 
The DLE has witnessed firsthand the dangers posed by illegal fireworks and the 
challenges in effectively enforcing existing regulations. As demonstrated through the 
work of the Illegal Fireworks Task Force established by Act 67, Session Laws of Hawaii 
2023, there is an urgent need for a more structured approach to fireworks enforcement. 
Since its establishment, the Task Force has successfully interdicted approximately 
,,..,.,..,___
ll,’ O F
”,éa...,,._'_
,,
,1’
'__........_‘_’.<§§i-u"‘_
A'
‘\_‘"I‘__
,>~
"'--.....--"'\,!
1
,.--‘
"--,_
1
_,v-""
u‘;\,_91_5.. 9; ,n ""11
M:
*_.—"'iI‘
,i“‘I3_n*£
4%:--.."‘
4'
%,.........
I
@-1m- "'

 
Department of Law Enforcement Testimony on 
HB1483HD1 Relating to FIREWORKS 
Page 2 
 
 
 
 
200,000 pounds of illegal fireworks from Hawaii's communities, highlighting the scale of 
this public safety issue. 
 
This bill addresses critical weaknesses in the current regulatory framework by 
establishing a dedicated adjudication system that will streamline the processing of 
fireworks infractions, allowing for more efficient enforcement and prosecution. The 
graduated penalty structure appropriately reflects the severity of violations, particularly 
those resulting in serious injury or death, which serves as both a deterrent and an 
appropriate response to the harm caused. 
 
The new system will enhance the ability of law enforcement to effectively address 
fireworks violations that endanger public safety, damage property, and disturb 
communities. By providing clear guidelines for adjudication and enforcement, this 
legislation supports the DLE's ongoing efforts to combat illegal fireworks and promote 
compliance with state fireworks control laws. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of this bill.  

 
STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
KA MOKU‘ĀINA O HAWAI‘I 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS 
KA ‘OIHANA PONO LIMAHANA 
 
830 PUNCHBOWL STREET, ROOM 321 
HONOLULU, HAWAII  96813 
 
www.labor.hawaii.gov 
 
 
 
 
March 11, 2025 
 
 
 
The Honorable Brandon Elefante, Chair 
Senate Committee on Public Safety 
and Military Affairs 
State Senate 
State Capitol, Room 217 
Honolulu, Hawaii 96813 
 
The Honorable Karl Rhoads, Chair 
Senate Committee on Judiciary 
State Senate 
State Capitol, Room 228 
Honolulu, Hawaii 96813 
 
Dear Chairs Elefante and Rhoads: 
 
Subject: House Bill (HB) 1483, House Draft (HD) 1, Relating to Fireworks  
 
I am Kazuo Todd, Chair of the Hawaii State Fire Council (SFC).  The SFC supports HB 1483, HD 
1, which establishes an adjudication system and procedures to process fireworks infractions; 
amends multiple definitions and penalties for fireworks offenses, including heightened penalties if 
another person suffers substantial bodily injury, serious bodily injury, or death as a result of the 
fireworks offenses; establishes various criminal offenses and penalties related to fireworks or 
articles pyrotechnics; and appropriates funds. 
 
The SFC supports legislation to facilitate enforcement and adjudication of the Fireworks Control 
Law and strongly urges your committees to pass HB 1483, HD 1.      
 
Should you have questions, please contact SFC Administrative Specialist Gary Lum at  
723-7169 or glum@honolulu.gov. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
KAZUO TODD  
Chair 
 
KT/GL 
JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR 
 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR 
 
 
JADE T. BUTAY 
DIRECTOR 
 
 
WILLIAM G. KUNSTMAN 
DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
:7";3 :o":'l_»'$
%ﬂ@
 	

 
 
                                                                                   
                                                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
March 12, 2025 
 
 
 
HB550, HD2:  RELATING TO FIREWORKS 
 
Chair Elefante, Vice Chair Wakai and Members of the Committee on Public Safety 
and Military Affairs 
Chair Rhoads, Vice Chair Gabbard and Members of the Committee on Judiciary 
 
The Office of the Public Defender (OPD) strongly opposes HB1483 HD1.  
 
The OPD acknowledges that the recent fireworks-caused incident in Aliamanu has 
brought to the forefront the issue of the State’s enforcement of its fireworks control laws. 
However, rather than enacting new offenses, increasing penalties and creating new and 
likely unconstitutional court processes, the Legislature should focus on actions which 
facilitate the enforcement of existing laws and regulations related to the import, sale and 
use of fireworks which are more than sufficient to serve as a deterrent and punish persons 
or businesses that violate the laws.  
 
Currently, Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 132D, the “Fireworks Control 
Law,” contains provisions which regulate the permissible use of consumer fireworks, 
display fireworks, articles of pyrotechnics and aerial devices. The current Fireworks 
Control Law also contains: 
 
• license and permit provisions 
• importation requirements 
• prohibitions against the sale of fireworks to minors 
• liability for parents and guardians who permit minors to possess, purchase, set off, 
or ignite fireworks  
• liability for homeowners, renters or persons responsible for real property who allow 
persons to possess, set off or ignite fireworks on their properties 
• enforcement provisions 
• civil and criminal penalties for violations 
 
JON N. IKENAGA 
                      PUBLIC DEFENDER 
 
DEFENDER COUNCIL 
1130 NORTH NIMITZ HIGHWAY 
SUITE A-254 
HONOLULU, HAWAI‘I  96817 
 
HONOLULU OFFICE 
1130 NORTH NIMITZ HIGHWAY 
SUITE A-254 
HONOLULU, HAWAI‘I  96817 
 
APPELLATE DIVISION 
TEL. NO. (808) 586-2080 
 
  DISTRICT COURT DIVISION 
TEL. NO. (808) 586-2100 
 
FAMILY COURT DIVISION 
TEL. NO. (808) 586-2300 
 
FELONY DIVISION 
TEL. NO. (808) 586-2200 
 
FACSIMILE 
 (808) 586-2222 
HAYLEY Y. C. CHENG 
                 ASSISTANT PUBLIC DEFENDER 
 
HILO OFFICE 
275 PONAHAWAI STREET 
SUITE 201 
HILO, HAWAI‘I   96720 
TEL. NO.  (808) 974-4571 
FAX NO.  (808) 974-4574 
 
KONA OFFICE 
75-1000 HENRY STREET  
SUITE #209 
KAILUA-KONA HI   96740 
TEL. NO.  (808) 327-4650 
FAX NO.  (808) 327-4651 
 
KAUA`I OFFICE 
3060 EIWA STREET 
 SUITE 206 
LIHUE, HAWAI‘I  96766 
TEL. NO.  (808) 241-7128 
FAX NO.  (808) 274-3422 
 
MAUI OFFICE 
81 N. MARKET STREET 
WAILUKU, HAWAI‘I  96793 
TEL. NO.  (808) 984-5018 
FAX NO.  (808) 984-5022 
STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
OFFICE OF THE PUBLIC DEFENDER 
»
,
~1~‘%f........,
8
* #xw*¢‘
,,,
~>_
/'
O F
-.
<§...........,'1»__‘
D,» u ‘Q 5 9
.
\
.. <I
'7 \
‘
y
1‘'1 T“: F‘
"-».'.........»-
53*-I0
E "i3if5.‘ipi
\
.
\'.v_*.Z.
_-4
;|,'?'L;,_
> . .
ﬂ_,.::'\_<$= 1‘
*@w%m$/
-.III‘,
 	

HB1483 HD1 
3-13-25 testimony 
Page 2 
 
 
Thus, under current law, there are ample provisions for law enforcement authorities and 
other government agencies to use to regulate and control use of fireworks. It is the lack of 
enforcement, not the lack or severity of penalties, that has not deterred persons and 
businesses from ceasing illegal fireworks activities.1 It is not necessary to increase penalties 
for offenses and regulations that are not regularly prosecuted and enforced. 
 
Honolulu Civil Beat recently reported on the extremely rare arrest, prosecution and 
sentencing of a Kapolei man, Daniel C. Young, who was charged with possession of 
pyrotechnics without a license and the sale of fireworks to someone who did not have a 
permit, both of which are felony offenses. 
 
Cases like Young’s are exceptionally rare, and prosecutions that result in 
serious penalties are even rarer. A Civil Beat investigation in 2023 found that 
cases related to illegal fireworks almost always go nowhere. Between 2018 
and 2022, 94% of citations on Oʻahu were either dismissed or charges were 
dropped, according to an analysis of data provided by the state judiciary. 
 
Young’s case is one of only two felony prosecutions stemming from the 
Department of Law Enforcement’s Illegal Fireworks Task Force since its 
creation in 2023.[2]  
 
 
1 Other legislation submitted this session would assist law enforcement and regulatory 
agencies in enforcing fireworks regulations and offenses. SB1226 addresses the 
importation of illegal fireworks into the State by establishing a shipping container 
inspection program and appropriating funds for the Department of Law Enforcement 
(DLE) for the effective detection, safe storage and disposal of illegal fireworks. SB222 
appropriates funds for the Illegal Fireworks Task Force for FY205-26 and 2026-27 and 
extends the sunset date of the act creating the task force to 2030. SB227 creates an Illegal 
Fireworks Enforcement Division within the DLE and appropriates funding for personnel 
for that unit. HB806 HD1 appropriates funds for the DLE to conduct sting operations to 
enforce fireworks ordinance or laws. The OPD did not comment on any of the 
aforementioned legislation which deals strictly with enforcement. SB302 bans the use of 
consumer fireworks for non-cultural purposes. The OPD submitted comment in opposition 
on SB302 but only as to concerns regarding the ambiguity of the definition of “cultural.”  
 
2 Thompson, C., “A Rare Prosecution For Selling Illegal Fireworks Ends With Supervised 
Release,” Honolulu Civil Beat, Feb. 20, 2025 (https://www.civilbeat.org/2025/02/a-rare-
conviction-for-selling-illegal-fireworks-ends-with-supervised-release/) 
 

HB1483 HD1 
3-13-25 testimony 
Page 3 
 
The Civil Beat article went on to note that in the last two years there have been only fifty 
(50) fireworks citations issued on O`ahu, half the number of citations issued annually in 
the last five years, even though the Illegal Fireworks Task Force estimates that illegal 
fireworks are being smuggled into Hawai`i on a daily basis. Thus, efforts should focus on 
enforcement of current laws and allow the Illegal Fireworks Task Force to exercise its 
authority to make recommendations on future legislative changes. 
 
The OPD also notes the following concerns with the bill. 
 
Concurrent trial provision 
 
Under the bill petty misdemeanor fireworks violations and civil fireworks 
infractions that occur “in the same course of conduct” are litigated in a “concurrent trial” 
in the district or family court on the same date and time. In other words, the bill authorizes 
a joint trial on a civil traffic violation and a criminal offense.3 This provision raises 
significant constitutional concerns and is likely illegal. 
 
The only other “concurrent trial” provisions which this writer is aware of are in 
Chapter 291D. Under Chapter 291D which appears to have been used as the model for the 
concurrent trial provisions in the bill, a traffic infraction, emergency period infraction and 
related criminal case committed in the same course of conduct as the traffic infraction or 
emergency period infraction may be tried in a concurrent trial. There are no Hawai‘i cases 
which have yet raised the issue of the legality or constitutionality of the concurrent trial 
provision of Chapter 291D – this does not mean that the provisions are legal or would 
withstand constitutional scrutiny. 
 
3 Pursuant to HRS § 701-107, grades and classes of offenses: 
 
 
(1)  An offense defined by this Code or any other statute of this State 
for which a sentence of imprisonment is authorized constitutes a crime. 
Crimes are of three grades: felonies, misdemeanors, and petty misdemeanors. 
… 
*  *  *  * 
 
(5)  An offense defined by this Code or by any other statute of this 
State constitutes a violation if it is so designated in this Code or in the law 
defining the offense or if no other sentence than a fine, or fine and forfeiture 
or other civil penalty, is authorized upon conviction or if it is defined by a 
statute other than this Code which provides that the offense shall not 
constitute a crime. A violation does not constitute a crime, and conviction of 
a violation shall not give rise to any civil disability based on conviction of a 
criminal offense. 
 

HB1483 HD1 
3-13-25 testimony 
Page 4 
 
 
Under the bill, the first issue arises in the civil infraction process. On the civil 
fireworks infraction section, the bill basically tracks the process followed in civil traffic 
infractions by the issuance of a notice of infraction followed by the requirement that the 
defendant submit an answer to the infraction. The defendant has three options in the answer 
– (1) admit, (2) deny and request a hearing, or (3) admit and request a hearing to explain 
mitigating circumstances. The problem caused by requiring such an answer is that this 
becomes a signed statement which can be used against the defendant in the concurrent trial 
on the criminal charge. While the bill precludes any statement made at a separate fireworks 
infraction trial to be used against the defendant in a subsequent trial on the related criminal 
charge, it does not address the issue of the admissibility of the written answer to the citation. 
Further, although the bill holds that any oral or written statement made by the defendant in 
a separate civil infraction trial and any testimony given by the defendant in that trial are 
not to be deemed as a waiver of the defendant’s privilege against self-incrimination in 
connection with the criminal offense, these statements are still admissible “as expressly 
provided by the Hawaii rules of evidence.” Under Rule 613 of the Hawai‘i Rules of 
Evidence (HRE) both prior consistent and inconsistent statements are admissible subject 
to certain requirements. Thus, a defendant who chose to admit and explain mitigating 
circumstances on the civil infraction could have that statement used against them in the 
criminal trial if they chose to testify. This could have a chilling effect on the defendant’s 
assertion of their right to testify in their own defense and constitute a violation of their 
constitutional rights under the sixth and fourteenth amendments to the U.S. Constitution 
and article I, section 14 of the Hawai‘i Constitution. 
 
The second issue in the bill arises in the conduct of a concurrent civil and criminal 
trial. The different procedural rules that apply to civil and criminal trials will definitely 
create issues. The Hawai‘i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) do not apply to traffic 
infractions as they are not “penal” in nature, i.e. carry the possibility of the penalty of 
incarceration.4 With different procedural rules applying to the civil and criminal trials a 
concurrent trial becomes a procedural nightmare. 
 
Another concurrent trial issues arises in the area of representation. The OPD 
represents “indigent” persons who are charged with offenses punishable by jail or prison. 
The OPD (or a court-appointed attorney) would be assigned to represent a defendant on a 
criminal fireworks charge that is a petty misdemeanor or above. The OPD does not 
represent defendants in civil matters (with the exception of civil commitment or 
involuntary medication proceedings). Therefore an indigent defendant in a concurrent 
 
4 For example, in State v. Lau, 78 Hawai‘i 54, 890 P.2d 291 (1995), the Hawai‘i Supreme 
Court confirmed that Rule 48 of the HRPP did not apply to traffic infractions that are not 
punishable by imprisonment. See also HRPP Rule 48(b). 
 

HB1483 HD1 
3-13-25 testimony 
Page 5 
 
fireworks infraction/fireworks offense trial would represent themselves on the civil 
infraction while the OPD would represent them only on the criminal fireworks charge. 5  
This would require the OPD to coordinate with the pro se civil defendant to present a 
combined defense.6  
 
The rules and caselaw regarding the admissibility of evidence also differ between 
civil and criminal trials. Evidence and statements may be admissible in the civil proceeding 
where, generally, the constitutional rights of the defendant are not at issue. By contrast, a 
defendant in a criminal trial has not only different procedural and statutory protections but 
the full panoply of constitutional rights which are afforded to criminal defendants. While 
the bill addresses the admissibility of oral or written statements made by the defendant in 
the civil infraction trial when held prior to the criminal trial, the bill does not address the 
admissibility of such statements in a concurrent trial. Realistically, it would be impossible 
for the judge to limit their consideration of statements or evidence admissible only in the 
civil proceeding and not be influenced or affected by those statements or evidence in the 
criminal proceeding.  
 
Constitutional issues are also presented by a concurrent trial. As previously 
mentioned, criminal defendants have a constitutional right to effective assistance of 
counsel under the sixth amendment to the U.S. Constitution and article I, section 14 of the 
Hawai‘i Constitution. If the defendant’s attorney’s representation in the criminal case is 
adversely or materially affected because of considerations related to the civil infraction, 
the defendant’s constitutional right to effective assistance of counsel will be violated. The 
defendant’s constitutional right to present a complete defense under the sixth amendment 
to the U.S. Constitution and article I, section 14 of the Hawai‘i Constitution7 may also be 
violated by the concurrent trial. If a defendant cannot present a complete defense in the 
criminal trial due to procedural rules, differing rules of evidence or admissibility or 
strategic consideration related to the civil infraction, their constitutional right to present a 
 
5 A similar issue would arise if a defendant hired separate attorneys for the criminal charge 
and civil infraction or if the defendant hired an attorney who represented them on only 
either the criminal charge or civil infraction. 
 
6 If the attorney from the OPD could not coordinate the combined defense with the pro se 
defendant, they would have an ethical duty to withdraw or if they proceeded could be 
subject to a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel. 
 
7 See e.g. State v. Abion, 148 Hawai‘i 445, 458, 478 P.3d 270, 283 (2020) (confirming that 
under the U.S. and Hawai‘i constitutions, a defendant has a constitutional due process right 
to be accorded a meaningful opportunity to present a complete defense, including the right 
to present any and all competent evidence in their defense). 
 

HB1483 HD1 
3-13-25 testimony 
Page 6 
 
complete defense would be violated. Another constitutional right that it affected by a 
concurrent trial is the defendant’s constitutional rights to testify or not to testify.8 If the 
defendant chooses to testify regarding the civil infraction, it should not be considered a 
waiver of their right not testify on the criminal offense. While the bill addresses this issue 
when the civil infraction trial precedes the criminal offense trial, it does not address this 
issue in a concurrent trial.9  
 
Unecessary creation of new offenses 
 
Without going line by line through the bill as to each of the new offenses created and 
amendments made to existing laws, the OPD believes that existing laws are sufficient to 
address the issue of illegal fireworks. In 2010, the Illegal Fireworks Task Force was created 
by the Legislature to “develop strategies and make recommendations to the Legislature to 
address the illegal importation and use of fireworks in the State.”10 These recommendations 
were: (1) increase fireworks fees and fines; (2) decriminalize fireworks offenses in favor 
of civil fines; (3) increase random inspections; (4) consider alternatives such as education 
and training; (5) promote cooperation between stakeholders.11 The problem is not the lack 
of laws to address the issue of illegal fireworks, it is the lack of enforcement of existing 
laws. Between 2018 and 2022, 94% of the citations for fireworks related violations on 
 
8 See e.g. State v. Monteil, 134 Hawai‘i 361, 341 P.3d 567 (2014) (confirming that under 
the Hawai‘i Constitution the defendant has the right to testify and not to testify). 
 
9 The issue of combining two separate proceedings and the implications on the defendant’s 
rights to testify and not to testify are presented even in a single criminal case where there 
is a hearing on a motion to suppress prior to trial. In State v. Chang, 144 Hawai‘i 535, 445 
P.3d 116 (2019), the Hawai‘i Supreme Court held that the defendant had to be advised that 
he could testifying at the hearing on the motion to suppress without that testimony being 
used against him at the subsequent trial. Id. at 545, 445 P.3d at 126. The Supreme Court 
also held that the trial court was also required to accurately advise the defendant of the 
implications of testifying in the unique context of a consolidated proceeding and its failure 
to do so constituted reversible error. Id. at 544, 445 P.3d at 125. 
 
10 Blast From the Past: An Update to the Report of the Illegal Fireworks Task Force to the 
Legislature for the Regular Session of 2011. 
 
11 The Task Force made additional suggestions: (1) consider the impact of increased cargo 
inspection on commerce and shipping; (2) impose jail time as a penalty for fireworks 
offenses; (3) fund seasonal, specialized fireworks enforcement units; and (4) reestablish 
statewide consumer fireworks standards. 
 

HB1483 HD1 
3-13-25 testimony 
Page 7 
 
Oahu ended in dismissal or dropped prosecutions.12 In 2023 and 2024, twelve fireworks 
related charges were dismissed without prejudice.13 In the recent Aliamanu case, ten people 
have already been arrested for fireworks offenses (using the Fireworks Control Law), 
reckless endangering in the first degree and endangering the welfare of a minor in the first 
degree – clearly charges can be brought under existing laws. In December 2023, two Oahu 
men were charged with felony offenses under the Fireworks Control Law.14 In the first six 
months of 2024, DLE officers seized approximately 1,000 pounds of illegal fireworks from 
various sources. The foregoing confirm that charges and convictions can be obtained under 
current laws. Increased enforcement of these laws will serve as an adequate deterrent effect, 
no new laws and penalties are needed. 
 
Final Comments 
 
The most problematic section of this bill is the concurrent trial provision. This 
attempt to streamline the adjudication process will inevitably lead to legal challenges and 
hinder, not help enforcement of existing laws.  
 
 
The OPD emphasizes that enforcement is the key. Deterrence will be achieved when 
people see that current laws are being enforced. Penalties under the current laws run from 
fines for civil infractions up to Class A felonies. Additional statutory provisions such as 
the reckless endangering and endangering the welfare of a minor statutes can also be used 
in charging all aspects of illegal fireworks violations. The most impact that can be made 
immediately is increased enforcement of current laws and prosecution under current laws. 
There is no utility in creating new offenses if they are not investigated and enforced. Any 
recommendations as to new legislation should come from the Illegal Fireworks Task Force 
as it was created specifically for this purpose.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this measure. 
 
 
12 Leonard, M., Valera, M., “Hawai‘i’s Illegal Fireworks Laws Aren’t Working. Is that 
About To Change?,” Jan. 14, 2025, Honolulu Civil Beat  
(https://www.civilbeat.org/2025/01/hawaiʻis-illegal-fireworks-laws-arent-working/) 
 
13 Id.. 
 
14 “Department of Law Enforcement Illegal Fireworks Task Force details recent 
enforcement 
actions,” 
July 
5, 
2024, 
Maui 
News 
(https://mauinow.com/2024/07/05/department-of-law-enforcement-illegal-fireworks-task-
force-details-recent-enforcement-actions/) 
 

RICK BLANGIARDI
OUR
HONOLULU POLICE DEPARTMENT
KA ‘OIHANA M/IKA‘I
O HONOLULU
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU
801 SOUTH BERETANIA STREET ' HONOLULU, HAWAl'l
96813
TELEPHONE
(B08) 529-3111 - WEBSITE www.h0r10luIggd grg
..-"'e*.=~..~.~
6: 1, i!‘._
.\-I‘:
1
,=.~
.1"--I
,
5
‘.2
,
.3’
\q_' ‘_ :-
"-.. . . . __.~"
ARTHURJ
LOGAN
CHIEF
KAHU MAK/‘l'I
MAYOR
MEIA
KEITH K
HORIKAWA
RADE
K
VANIC
DEPUTY CHIEFS
HOPE LUNA NUI M/IKA I
REFERENCE
March 13, 2025
The Honorable Brandon J.C. Elefante, Chair
and Members
Committee on Public Safety and Military Affairs
The Honorable Karl Rhoads, Chair
and Members
Committee on Judiciary
State Senate
415 South Beretania Street, Room O16
Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96813
Dear Chairs Elefante and Rhoads and Members:
SUBJECT: House Bill No. 1483, H.D. 1, Relating to Fireworks
I am Major Randall Platt of District 4 (Kailua/Kane‘ohe/Kahuku) of the Honolulu Police
Department (HPD), City and County of Honolulu.
The HPD supports House Bill No. 1483, H.D. 1, Relating to Fireworks.
The HPD supports this bill which seeks to clarify the definitions of fireworks and improve
enforcement.
The HPD also believes that better enforcement of the fireworks control laws is essential
not only to safeguard property from preventable ﬁre damage but also to protect the community
from injuries related to fires and explosions, respiratory issues caused by air pollution, and
ongoing trauma experienced by individuals due to loud explosions.
The HPD urges you to support House Bill No. 1483, H.D. 1, Relating to Fireworks.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
APPROVED:
Sincerely,
72‘
—-~\
Q it @349-
Arthur
.
ogan
Randall Platt, Major
Chief of Police
District 4
Servmg IVzth Integrzty, Respect, Fazrness, and the Aloha Spzrzt

HONOLULU FIRE DEPARTMENT 
KA ʻOIHANA KINAI AHI O HONOLULU 
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU 
636 SOUTH STREET • HONOLULU, HAWAIʻI 96813 
PHONE: (808) 723-7139 • FAX: (808) 723-7111 • WEBSITE: honolulu.gov 
  
 
SHELDON K. HAO  
FIRE CHIEF 
LUNA NUI KINAI AHI 
 
JASON SAMALA  
DEPUTY FIRE CHIEF 
HOPE LUNA NUI KINAI AHI 
RICK BLANGIARDI  
MAYOR 
MEIA 
 
 
 
 
 
March 11, 2025 
 
 
 
The Honorable Brandon Elefante, Chair 
Committee on Public Safety 
    and Military Affairs 
State Senate 
State Capitol, Room 217 
Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96813 
 
The Honorable Karl Rhoads, Chair 
Committee on Judiciary 
State Senate 
State Capitol, Room 228 
Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96813 
 
Dear Chairs Elefante and Rhoads: 
 
Subject:  House Bill (HB) 1483, House Draft (HD) 1 Relating to Fireworks  
 
I am Sheldon K. Hao, Fire Chief of the Honolulu Fire Department (HFD).  The HFD supports  
HB 1483, HD 1, which establishes an adjudication system and procedures to process fireworks 
infractions; amends multiple definitions and penalties for fireworks offenses, including 
heightened penalties if another person suffers substantial bodily injury, serious bodily injury, or 
death as a result of the fireworks offenses; establishes various criminal offenses and penalties 
related to fireworks or articles pyrotechnics; and appropriates funds. 
 
The HFD supports legislation to facilitate enforcement and adjudication of the Fireworks Control 
Law and strongly urges your committees to pass HB 1483, HD 1.      
 
Should you have questions, please contact Administrative Specialist Gary Lum at 723-7169 or 
glum@honolulu.gov. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
SHELDON K. HAO 
 
Fire Chief 
 
SKH/GL:cn 
 
l2l‘I'y
“MTV
._
'.
Ecru
.
»M“-\
°°
015'
0 .-
0
_. »
9
 ‘
‘Q’
.. K"\
Digitally signed by Hao, 
Sheldon K 
Date: 2025.03.11 15:16:41 
-10'00'

C Km-[0 A],m|,-“la, ]*h,]),
Benjamin T MOSZk0\\lL£
I,,r;_.w,,-
I
_.'
' ,_\'y;-
_
‘E
Pour (Jmf
ENh\.i'f;_{l :1-5
.
2_ :1.-II-It
I
g
I
"1-__...--,___»
-
I
-,
n
=v,_
T
Q,-gr
_¢
,
-F;=‘=='"““‘-.=ﬁ"#.—-"'-'.-"
' Ta;
William V Brilhante Jr.
'""""
Reed K Mahuna
lfrlﬂlikf-‘I1. llwffﬂf
I ‘ I
Dt'pm‘i Palm ("hit f
County of Hawal 1
POLICE DEI'AR'l'l\/I ENT
3-~i9 l\':|pi‘ol:u1i3~;treet I
llilU_ ll;l\\t1i'i 9f>?Ill-_‘s‘}(Jl'l
($03) ‘J35-33l l
I
l"tl:\'(l'liI8)‘Jt'1l-118'-ll
March IO, 2025
Senator Brandon .l.C. Elefante. Chair
Senator Glenn Wakai, Vice Chair. and Members
Committee on Public Safety and Military Affairs
Senator Karl Rhoads. Chair
Senator Mike Gabbard. Vice Chair, and Members
Committee on Judiciary
State Capitol
415 South Beretania Street
Honolulu. HI 96813
Dear Senator lilelante and Senator Rhoads:
R11:
HOUSE BILL 1483. HDI RELATING TO FIRIEWORKS
DATIZ: MARCH I3, Z025
TIME: 9:30 A.M.
PLACE: CONFERENCF. ROOM OI6 8: VIDEOCONI-‘F.Rl-INCF.
The Hawai‘i Police Department(l*lPD)respeetﬂ1lly submits testimony supporting House Bill I483
I-lDl. Relating to Fireworks.
Strengthening laws that aim to curb the use oliunpermitted. illegal ﬁreworks is critical to protecting
public safety.
HPD urges the committees to support l-louse Bill
I483. HDI. which would establish an
adjudication system and procedures to process ﬁreworks infractions and amend definitions and
penalties For ﬁreworks olTcnses, including heightened penalties ifanother person suﬂers substantial
or serious bodily injury or death as a result ol'the ﬁreworks otTenses.
Thank you for allowing the Hawai'i Police Department to provide comments relating to l-louse
Bill I483.
Respectfully,
/
K
ENJ
MIN T. MOS
W
POLICE Cl-l [Eli
“lIa\\ai'i Count} is an Equal Opportunity |’ro\'it|e1' and E|nplo}er"
C Km-[0 A],m|,-“la, ]*h,]),
Benjamin T MOSZk0\\lL£
I,,r;_.w,,-
I
_.'
' ,_\'y;-
_
‘E
Pour (Jmf
ENh\.i'f;_{l :1-5
.
2_ :1.-II-It
I
g
I
"1-__...--,___»
-
I
-,
n
=v,_
T
Q,-gr
_¢
,
-F;=‘=='"““‘-.=ﬁ"#.—-"'-'.-"
' Ta;
William V Brilhante Jr.
'""""
Reed K Mahuna
lfrlﬂlikf-‘I1. llwffﬂf
I ‘ I
Dt'pm‘i Palm ("hit f
County of Hawal 1
POLICE DEI'AR'l'l\/I ENT
3-~i9 l\':|pi‘ol:u1i3~;treet I
llilU_ ll;l\\t1i'i 9f>?Ill-_‘s‘}(Jl'l
($03) ‘J35-33l l
I
l"tl:\'(l'liI8)‘Jt'1l-118'-ll
March IO, 2025
Senator Brandon .l.C. Elefante. Chair
Senator Glenn Wakai, Vice Chair. and Members
Committee on Public Safety and Military Affairs
Senator Karl Rhoads. Chair
Senator Mike Gabbard. Vice Chair, and Members
Committee on Judiciary
State Capitol
415 South Beretania Street
Honolulu. HI 96813
Dear Senator lilelante and Senator Rhoads:
R11:
HOUSE BILL 1483. HDI RELATING TO FIRIEWORKS
DATIZ: MARCH I3, Z025
TIME: 9:30 A.M.
PLACE: CONFERENCF. ROOM OI6 8: VIDEOCONI-‘F.Rl-INCF.
The Hawai‘i Police Department(l*lPD)respeetﬂ1lly submits testimony supporting House Bill I483
I-lDl. Relating to Fireworks.
Strengthening laws that aim to curb the use oliunpermitted. illegal ﬁreworks is critical to protecting
public safety.
HPD urges the committees to support l-louse Bill
I483. HDI. which would establish an
adjudication system and procedures to process ﬁreworks infractions and amend definitions and
penalties For ﬁreworks olTcnses, including heightened penalties ifanother person suﬂers substantial
or serious bodily injury or death as a result ol'the ﬁreworks otTenses.
Thank you for allowing the Hawai'i Police Department to provide comments relating to l-louse
Bill I483.
Respectfully,
/
K
ENJ
MIN T. MOS
W
POLICE Cl-l [Eli
“lIa\\ai'i Count} is an Equal Opportunity |’ro\'it|e1' and E|nplo}er"

  RICHARD T. BISSEN, JR. 
Mayor 
 
ANDREW H. MARTIN 
Prosecuting Attorney 
 
SHELLY C. MIYASHIRO 
First Deputy Prosecuting Attorney 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE PROSECUTING ATTORNEY 
COUNTY OF MAUI 
200 SOUTH HIGH STREET 
WAILUKU, MAUI, HAWAI’I  96793 
           PHONE (808) 270-7777  •  FAX (808) 270-7625 
 
TESTIMONY ON 
H.B. 1483 HD1 
RELATING TO FIREWORKS 
 
March 12, 2025 
 
 
 
 
The Honorable Brandon J.C. Elefante 
Chair 
The Honorable Glenn Wakai 
Vice Chair 
and Members of the Committee on Public Safety and Military Affairs 
 
The Honorable Karl Rhoads 
Chair 
The Honorable Mike Gabbard 
Vice Chair 
and Members of the Committee on Judiciary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chairs Elefante and Rhoads, Vice Chairs Wakai and Gabbard, and Members of the Committees: 
 
The Department of the Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui respectfully submits the 
following comments in support of H.B. 1483 HD1, Relating to Fireworks. This bill amends 
multiple definitions and penalties for fireworks offenses, as well as creates a fireworks infraction 
adjudication system and new fireworks offenses. 
 
 
The Department of the Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui supports this bill because it 
would help protect our community from the yearly effects of illegal fireworks, such as fire- and 
explosion-related property damage and injuries, respiratory distress stemming from fireworks 
smoke and annual trauma to humans and animals stemming from loud fireworks explosions. We 
would note that videos depicting staggering amounts of illegal fireworks being set off every New 
Year’s Eve are readily viewable online and illustrate the inadequacy of our current laws. In our 
view, H.B. 1483 HD1’s increased penalties and proposed fireworks infraction adjudication 
process would go a long way to deterring the sale, purchase and use of illegal fireworks, as well 
as ensuring that people who willfully disobey the law are held accountable to an appropriate 
.- 0
0, '
.
4
‘.
w.‘ &
-*“
_.-"
'0,
P _-’
'4r
4* \
~.
5 or v\F/ ~
"M-.-"
 
it
I

degree for their actions.  
 
 
For these reasons, the Department of the Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui supports 
H.B. 1483 HD1.  Please feel free to contact our office at (808) 270-7777 if you have any 
questions or inquiries.  
 
Thank you very much for the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
March 12, 2025 
 
The Honorable Brandon Elefante, Chair 
Senate Committee on Public Safety 
and Military Affairs 
State Senate 
State Capitol, Room 217 
Honolulu, Hawaii 96813 
 
The Honorable Karl Rhoads, Chair 
Senate Committee on Judiciary 
State Senate 
State Capitol, Room 228 
Honolulu, Hawaii 96813 
 
Dear Chairs Elefante and Rhoads: 
 
SUBJECT:  HOUSE BILL (HB) 1483, HOUSE DRAFT (HD) 1, RELATING TO  
FIREWORKS  
 
I am Bradford K. Ventura, member of the Hawaii State Fire Council (SFC) and Fire Chief 
of the Maui Fire Department.  The SFC supports HB 1483, HD 1, which establishes an adjudication 
system and procedures to process fireworks infractions; amends multiple definitions and penalties 
for fireworks offenses, including heightened penalties if another person suffers substantial bodily 
injury, serious bodily injury, or death as a result of the fireworks offenses; establishes various 
criminal offenses and penalties related to fireworks or articles pyrotechnics; and appropriates funds. 
 
The SFC supports legislation to facilitate enforcement and adjudication of the Fireworks 
Control Law and strongly urges your committees to pass HB 1483, HD 1.      
 
If you have questions, please contact SFC Administrative Specialist Gary Lum at (808) 723-
7169 or glum@honolulu.gov. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BRADFORD K. VENTURA  
 
Fire Chief   
 
 
RICHARD T. BISSEN, JR. 
Mayor 
 
JOSIAH K. NISHITA 
Managing Director 
 
BRADFORD K. VENTURA 
Fire Chief 
 
GAVIN L.M. FUJIOKA 
Deputy Fire Chief 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF FIRE & PUBLIC SAFETY 
COUNTY OF MAUI 
200 DAIRY ROAD 
KAHULUI, MAUI, HAWAIʻI 96732 
www.mauicounty.gov 
 
 
__.-‘ °,;1v or M *.,
; 0°
40’ "v.
_..~
-~._'
I»
"-
'47-
~N
~>
\~\-um...-
__.~..-‘.1,
s
1
I- 0 3‘
"“~.....-“
1%/M
Iﬁ\
 	

 
C:\Users\mkk\AppData\Local\Microsoft\Windows\INetCache\Content.Outlook\PRZJKYJA\HB 1483 HD1 testimony 3.11.25 
(fireworks ban) (2022566.1) (2024026.1).doc 
PHANTOM FIREWORKS  
Distributors of Phantom® and Wolf Pack® Brand Fireworks 
 
 
                     
 
 
2445 Belmont Ave 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  o. 330.746.1064 
Youngstown, Ohio 44505   
 
 
 
                                  dpeart@fireworks.com 
Danial Peart, Director of Government Affairs  
 
        
 
          www.fireworks.com                                     
              
           
 
House Bill 1483 
 
Good morning Chair Elefante, Chair Rhoads and members of the committees on Public 
Safety & Military Affairs, and Judiciary.  My name is Dan Peart, Director of Government Affairs 
for Phantom Fireworks, one of the leading retailers of consumer fireworks in the country.  Thank 
you for the opportunity to present our comments on HB 1483, HD1. 
Fireworks play an important role in marking significant occasions such as New Year’s 
Eve, Chinese New Year, and the Fourth of July, bringing families and communities together in 
celebration. Clearly, Phantom Fireworks understands the importance of tackling the illegal 
fireworks market and we have supported a number of those efforts each year.  We’ve had great 
relationships with our enforcement officials and our inspection history is pristine.  
Further restrictions to consumer fireworks could unfairly penalize required to divert 
limited resources thereby neglecting the more important problem of stopping the proliferation of 
the aerial fireworks. Instead of penalizing residents who follow the rules, the legislature should 
strengthen measures to detect and intercept illegal fireworks and provide the proper resources for 
better enforcement of existing laws. 
In order to avoid inadvertent restrictions to consumer fireworks, we propose an 
amendment to ensure that licensed distributors are not unintentionally impacted by the 
amendments to possession of consumer fireworks (changes to HB 1483, HD1 are in red bold): 
§132D-E  Consumer fireworks prohibitions.  (a) It 
shall be unlawful for any person to: 
     (1)  Purchase, possess, set off, ignite, discharge, or 
otherwise cause to explode any consumer fireworks without a 
permit required pursuant to section 132D-10; this subsection 
shall not limit the ability of retailers licensed pursuant to 
section 132D-7 to store and transport consumer fireworks; or 
     (2)  Set off, ignite, discharge, or otherwise cause to 
explode any consumer fireworks at any time not within the 
periods for use prescribed in section 132D-3. 
     (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute 
consumer fireworks: 
     (1)  More than seven calendar days before the time 
periods for permissible use under section 132D-3; or 

 
C:\Users\mkk\AppData\Local\Microsoft\Windows\INetCache\Content.Outlook\PRZJKYJA\HB 1483 HD1 testimony 3.11.25 
(fireworks ban) (2022566.1) (2024026.1).doc 
     (2)  After 12:01 a.m. on New Year's Day, 6:00 p.m. 
on Chinese New Year's Day, or 8:00 p.m. on the Fourth of July. 
Additionally, HB 1483, HD1 introduces a complex adjudication system that risks 
burdening the judicial system with minor infractions, diverting resources from more serious 
public safety concerns. The creation of a separate fireworks infraction system, a costly specialty 
court, may not effectively deter illegal fireworks use, as enforcement has historically been a 
challenge due to the limited resources spent in locating and prosecuting the illegal fireworks 
themselves. Instead policymakers should consider a more nuanced solution that balances public 
safety with community education and funding enforcement through the task force, ensuring that 
enforcement is both effective and fair.  Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Sincerely, 
Danial Peart 

 
AMERICAN PROMOTIONAL EVENTS, INC. 
2120 MILWAUKEE WAY • TACOMA, WA 98421 
TACOMA (253) 922-0800 • FAX (253) 830-2930 
www.tntfireworks.com 
Senator Brandon J.C. Elefante, Chair 
Senator Glenn Wakai, Vice Chair 
Senate Committee on Public Safety & Military Affairs 
 
Senator Karl Rhoads, Chair 
Senator Mike Gabbard, Vice Chair 
Senate Committee on Judiciary 
 
 
HB 1483 HD1 - Relating to Fireworks – Comments, Request Amendments 
Thursday, March 13, 2025 at 9:30 a.m. 
Conference Room 016 & Videoconference 
 
 
Aloha Chairs Elefante and Rhoads, Vice Chairs Wakai and Gabbard, and members of the 
Committees: 
 
TNT Fireworks (“TNT”) offers comments on HB 1483 HD1 and requests amendments.  
 
TNT is the largest distributor of fireworks in the U.S. and an importer and seller of legal and safe 
consumer fireworks in Hawaii.  TNT has had a presence in Hawaii for over 20 years and we partner 
with retailers such as Longs Drugs, KTA Supermarket, Marukai, Don Quijote, Costco, Foodland, 
Malama Market, Food Pantry, Times Supermarkets and many others. 
 
HB 1483 HD1 proposes to amend fireworks control laws in Hawaii, focusing on enforcement, 
penalties, and establishing a fireworks courts system. However, we respectfully disagree that this bill 
provides the necessary clarity particularly as it relates to “consumer fireworks.”  
 
First, this measure imposes restrictions on consumer fireworks without recognizing that county 
ordinances permit the types of consumer fireworks that are permitted in each county. By sweeping 
all consumer fireworks without consideration that ground based novelties such as sparklers and 
fountains are permitted in most counties, the bill is essentially a ban on all these products.  
 
Second, in Section 7 of the bill, it removes county authority to issue licenses and permits under 
§132D-7, creating ambiguity. Given that county fire departments issue permits to wholesalers and 
retailers, there does not seem to be a clear replacement agency to issue permits. Moreover, 
consumer fireworks permit issuance varies by county, with all counties except Oahu allowing 
purchase at retail locations alongside firecrackers.  
 
While well-intentioned, this measure may have negative repercussions for businesses, agencies, 
and the continued safe and responsible use of consumer fireworks where permitted. 
 

 
AMERICAN PROMOTIONAL EVENTS, INC. 
2120 MILWAUKEE WAY • TACOMA, WA 98421 
TACOMA (253) 922-0800 • FAX (253) 830-2930 
www.tntfireworks.com 
 
However, if the committees are inclined to advance this measure, we respectfully request 
amendments so we do not impose unnecessary and unintentional restrictions on consumer 
fireworks: 
 
Page 37, lines 1-14 
 
§132D-E  Consumer fireworks prohibitions.  (a)  It shall be unlawful for any 
person to: 
 
(1) 
Purchase, possess, set off, ignite, discharge, or otherwise cause to 
explode [any] consumer fireworks, excluding firecrackers, without a permit required 
pursuant to section 132D-10 except in counties where such activities are not 
prohibited; or 
 
(2) 
Set off, ignite, discharge, or otherwise cause to explode any consumer 
fireworks at any time not within the periods for use prescribed in section 132D-3. 
 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute consumer fireworks to a 
consumer: 
 
(1) 
More than five calendar days before the time periods for permissible use 
under section 132D-3; or 
 
(2) 
After 12:01 a.m. on New Year's Day, 6:00 p.m. on Chinese New Year's 
Day, or 8:00 p.m. on the Fourth of July. 
 
Notwithstanding subsection (a), a retailer or wholesaler licensed under §132D-7 may 
transport and store consumer fireworks in any county, provided that such fireworks are 
ultimately intended for sale and use in a county where such sale and use are permitted by 
county ordinance, and further provided that such transport and storage comply with all 
applicable state and federal safety regulations. 
 
We request a safe harbor provision to specifically allow licensed retailers and wholesalers to 
transport and store consumer fireworks, even in counties where use is restricted, provided they are 
transporting or storing them for sale in counties where such consumer fireworks are permitted. This 
is critical to avoid an undue burden on businesses operating across multiple counties with differing 
regulations. 
 
In closing, rather than expanding restrictions on all fireworks, officials should focus on the more 
pressing issue of curbing illegal aerial fireworks. Broadening the ban would force authorities to 
allocate scarce resources towards penalizing users of consumer fireworks, distracting from efforts to 
combat the proliferation of more dangerous aerial varieties. Instead of punishing law-abiding 
residents, the legislature should: 1) enhance measures to detect and intercept illegal fireworks; and 
2) allocate adequate resources for improved enforcement of existing laws. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
 
 
 
 
 

Mōʻiliʻili Campus 
2700 Waiʻalae Avenue 
Honolulu, HI 96826 
Kosasa Family Campus at Hoʻopili 
91-1945 Fort Weaver Road 
ʻEwa Beach, HI 96706 
(808) 356-2200 | HawaiianHumane.org 
The Hawaiian Humane Society is dedicated to promoting the human-
animal bond and the humane treatment of all animals. 
 
 
 
Date: 
March 10, 2025 
 
To:  
Chairs Sens. Brandon J.C. Elefante & Karl Rhoads 
 
Vice Chairs Sens. Glenn Wakai & Mike Gabbard 
and Members of the Committees on  
Public Safety and Military Affairs & Judiciary 
 
Submitted By: Stephanie Kendrick, Director of Community Engagement 
 
Hawaiian Humane Society, 808-356-2217  
 
RE: 
 Testimony in support of HB 1483, HD1: Relating to Fireworks 
 
Thursday, March 13, 2025, 9:30 a.m., Room 016 & Videoconference 
 
 
On behalf of the Hawaiian Humane Society, thank you for considering our support for 
House Bill 1483, HD1, which establishes an adjudication system and procedures to 
process fireworks infractions; amends multiple definitions and penalties for fireworks 
offenses, including heightened penalties if another person suffers substantial bodily 
injury, serious bodily injury, or death as a result of the fireworks offenses; establishes 
various criminal offenses and penalties related to fireworks or articles pyrotechnics; 
and appropriates funds.  
Hawaiian Humane supports any attempt to restrict fireworks from residential 
neighborhoods. Despite tragic deaths and injuries spanning many years - and reaching 
a new level of horror on Oʻahu this year - the crime of using illegal fireworks is rarely 
punished. This comprehensive measure aims to increase enforcement against 
fireworks infractions by creating a new system of adjudication and new penalties to 
address the current failures of our legal system. 
These bombs increasingly go off without regard to date and terrorize pets and people 
alike. The unpredictable barrage makes it impossible to prepare and creates sustained 
stress, which can do lasting damage to emotional, mental and physical health.  
Please pass HB1483, HD1, and hold the perpetrators of these crimes accountable. Mahalo 
for your consideration. 
ﬁg
tr
Hawaiian Humane Society
Pwple For animals. Animals For people.

 
 
Hawaii Representatives & Senators: 
 
On behalf of the Libertarian Party of Hawaii, I am writing to express our strong opposition to any 
prohibitions and enforcement measures targeting fireworks. We believe Hawaiians have the 
right to pursue and engage in any activities that bring them joy and fulfillment. 
 
Fireworks prohibitions and regulations infringe upon the freedom of our citizens to partake in 
this time-honored custom, diminishing the spirit of celebration and unity that fireworks bring. 
 
Implementing strict enforcement measures to crack down on fireworks usage would only serve 
to burden law enforcement resources, and divert needed attention away from more pressing 
issues. Prohibitions and heavy enforcement will lead to unnecessary conflict between police and 
citizens, eroding trust and creating an atmosphere of fear and animosity. Causing harm against 
another person is already illegal, and crimes can already be prosecuted without these new 
tyrannical enforcement measures.  
 
The Libertarian Party of Hawaii stands firm in our support of individual freedom and opposes 
any measures that encroach upon our citizens' rights.  
 
In Freedom, 
 
Abbra Green 
Executive Secretary, Libertarian Party of Hawaii 
lphisecretary@gmail.com  
LIBER1m4;\~
 	

HB-1483-HD-1 
Submitted on: 3/11/2025 7:05:32 AM 
Testimony for PSM on 3/13/2025 9:30:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Gregory Misakian 
Individual 
Support 
Remotely Via 
Zoom 
 
 
Comments:  
I support HB1483 HD1. 
Gregory Misakian 
 

HB-1483-HD-1 
Submitted on: 3/10/2025 10:41:33 AM 
Testimony for PSM on 3/13/2025 9:30:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Lynn Murakami 
Akatsuka 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I strongly support HB 1483, HD 1 passage this legislative session.  This legislation aims to 
reduce the use of illegal fireworks by strengthening current fireworks laws to keep our residents 
and neighborhoods safe.  It has been on-going public health issue for years. 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in strong support of HB 1483, HD 1. 
 

HB-1483-HD-1 
Submitted on: 3/10/2025 3:34:02 PM 
Testimony for PSM on 3/13/2025 9:30:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
lynne matusow 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Hopefully, this will be another efficient tool in the toolbox to punish those who commit 
fireworks infractions. Enough is enough already, with people and pets killed, injured, houses 
burned, and emergency responders overtaxed. It is time to stop talking and start acting. The 
excuse that fireworks are cultural does not cut it any longer. The harm greatly outweighs culture. 
All fireworks should be provided by licensed organizations. 
  
 

HB-1483-HD-1 
Submitted on: 3/10/2025 4:29:13 PM 
Testimony for PSM on 3/13/2025 9:30:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Lisa Anderson  
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I support this bill 
 

HB-1483-HD-1 
Submitted on: 3/11/2025 6:13:15 AM 
Testimony for PSM on 3/13/2025 9:30:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Frank Schultz 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I support this initiative. 
 

HB-1483-HD-1 
Submitted on: 3/11/2025 6:43:16 PM 
Testimony for PSM on 3/13/2025 9:30:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Beverly Heiser 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha Chairs Elefante & Rhoads, Vice Chairs Wakai & Gabbard, and Committee Members, 
I STRONGLY SUPPORT HB 1483,  HD1, 
There are so many who believe that change will not happen, even after the Aliamanu incident. 
The lack of passing enforceable laws year after year have created this belief, that I hope does not 
hold true this year. Minor fireworks incidents are not always reported to show the danger of 
illegal fireworks. This past New Year’s Eve, a vlog posted by a student who moved to Laie to 
attend college, got hit by a firework nearly missing his eye. If it had hit about a quarter inch 
closer, he could have been blind. He was just walking in the streets taking video of the fireworks. 
He ended up in the Kahuku emergency room for treatment. To see the vlog and his comments, 
search “Tyson’s Wilderness, New Year’s in Hawaiʻi Gone Wrong”.  
After a slight decrease in illegal fireworks in 2023, thanks to the Illegal Fireworks Task Force 
making several large seizures at the docks, there was a significant increase in 2024. Bills pending 
this year that would establish a Fireworks Enforcement Division or increase personnel and 
provide what the Illegal Fireworks Task Force needs should address the problem if passed.  
The Task Force has been doing an excellent job, but other current laws have proved weak, does 
not provide deterrence, are difficult to enforce and virtually almost impossible to prosecute. 
Having individuals take videos, risking retaliation, assaults, and getting injured from fireworks, 
have proved useless because once fireworks explodes there is no evidence, and many are not 
willing to testify. It was mentioned that one of the main roadblocks to enforce and prosecute 
illegal fireworks was the way these type of fireworks were defined.  
HB 1483 HD1 provides an excellent solution by amending definitions and penalties for 
fireworks offenses, and implementing a dedicated adjudication system for fireworks infractions 
similar to traffic infractions. This will make it easier for officers to increase enforcement of end-
use violators and make it easier and faster to adjudicate cases in a district or family court.  An 
exorbitant amount is spent on fireworks, so hopefully fines will be hefty enough and escalate as 
needed until a point of deterrence is achieved. Slowing the flow of illegal fireworks entering the 
islands, together with an adjudication system will add to effectiveness. 
In the area where I live, aerials were most prominent this past New Year’s Eve. These aerials 
come not from a nearby neighbor, but travel from a street or two over. What I found most 

disturbing when cleaning up the mess is the use of more plastics. When these tubes explode parts 
of it shatters, scattering small sharp pieces of plastic in the grass. The goal is to reduce plastics, 
but aerials that have no useful purpose scatter it everywhere. It takes patience each year cleaning 
up debris that we were not responsible for. It’s troubling for people who have to pay for damages 
caused by illegal fireworks because there is no evidence and proof who did it.  A post this past 
New Year’s Eve showed a gaping hole in a Waipahu roof where debris landed on furniture and 
the floor. We cringe when we hear  an aerial hit our roof. My neighbor has a nice garden and 
plants vegetables to eat. This past New Year’s Eve she actually covered what she could of her 
garden so firework chemicals and debris would not contaminate her plants and soil.You would 
think the Aliamanu incident would make people think twice, but I still hear illegal fireworks 
every now and then.  
There was another recent incident on 1/28/25 where a 27 year-old woman sustained serious 
multiple shrapnel injuries after igniting fireworks.  
Please provide full support for HB 1483, HD1. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
 

HB-1483-HD-1 
Submitted on: 3/11/2025 10:09:21 PM 
Testimony for PSM on 3/13/2025 9:30:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Ted Bohlen 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
SUPPORT! 
 

HB-1483-HD-1 
Submitted on: 3/10/2025 2:50:48 PM 
Testimony for PSM on 3/13/2025 9:30:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Michael A. Cobb Jr 
Individual 
Oppose 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
We do not need more laws, the current laws need to be enforced. I oppose this measure to create 
new regulations and increase the tax burden on the people. 
 

HB-1483-HD-1 
Submitted on: 3/11/2025 9:28:33 PM 
Testimony for PSM on 3/13/2025 9:30:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Nicholas Zehr 
Individual 
Oppose 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Honorable Chair, Vice Chair, and Members of the Committee, 
I write to express my opposition to HB1483, which proposes to establish an adjudication system 
for fireworks infractions while expanding the definitions and penalties associated with fireworks 
offenses. While I acknowledge the Legislature’s duty to protect public safety and reduce the 
risks associated with fireworks, I am concerned that this bill introduces excessive regulation that 
may infringe on personal liberties and lead to unintended negative consequences. 
Fireworks have long been a part of Hawai‘i’s cultural and celebratory traditions. While any 
injury or fatality is deeply regrettable, the proposed enhanced penalties—especially for 
hypothetical injuries—risk criminalizing behaviors that, when conducted responsibly, do not 
directly harm others. Existing laws already address negligence and recklessness adequately. 
Overly broad criminalization could burden the justice system and deter responsible cultural 
practices without demonstrably improving overall public safety. 
Legitimate concerns about public safety warrant focused and effective enforcement of existing 
regulations rather than the creation of an expansive new system. These measures can lead to 
inefficient use of law enforcement resources that might be better directed toward 
preventing genuinely dangerous behavior. A targeted approach—focusing on cases with clear 
evidence of recklessness—would more precisely balance community safety with the preservation 
of individual rights. 
Rather than instituting sweeping new penalties, I recommend exploring alternatives that promote 
responsible fireworks use while respecting personal liberty: 
• 
Local Permitting Systems: Empower local governments to oversee community 
fireworks displays through tailored permitting processes that reflect local values and 
conditions. 
• 
Voluntary Safety Education: Support community-driven safety programs that educate 
citizens on best practices, reducing risks without resorting to punitive measures. 
• 
Private Sector Initiatives: Encourage private enterprises to offer certified, safer 
fireworks options, using market incentives to promote responsible behavior. 
These measures harness community engagement and market forces, addressing safety concerns 
more directly without the broad intrusion of a centralized adjudication system. 

While the goal of protecting public health is paramount, this bill risks overstepping by instituting 
excessive governmental intervention that could stifle cultural practices and personal freedoms. I 
respectfully urge the Legislature to reconsider this approach and seek a more nuanced solution 
that preserves both safety and liberty. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Sincerely, 
Nicholas Zehr 
 
