STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND FINANCE 
Ka ʻOihana Mālama Mo‘ohelu a Kālā 
P.O. BOX 150 
HONOLULU, HAWAI‘I  96810-0150 
 
 
 
JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
LUIS P. SALAVERIA 
GOVERNOR 
DIRECTOR 
 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
 
SABRINA NASIR 
LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR 
DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADMINISTRATIVE AND RESEARCH OFFICE 
EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM 
 
BUDGET, PROGRAM PLANNING AND MANAGEMENT DIVISION 
HAWAI‘I EMPLOYER-UNION HEALTH BENEFITS TRUST FUND 
 
FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION DIVISION 
OFFICE OF THE PUBLIC DEFENDER 
 
OFFICE OF FEDERAL AWARDS MANAGEMENT 
 
 
 
 
No. 1 Capitol District Building, 250 S. Hotel Street, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813 
 
WRITTEN ONLY 
TESTIMONY BY LUIS P. SALAVERIA 
DIRECTOR, DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND FINANCE 
TO THE SENATE COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS 
ON 
HOUSE BILL NO. 934, H.D. 1, S.D. 1 
 
April 1, 2025 
10:01 a.m. 
Room 211 and Videoconference 
 
 
RELATING TO THE HAWAII BROADBAND AND DIGITAL EQUITY OFFICE 
 
The Department of Budget and Finance (B&F) offers comments on this bill. 
 
House Bill (H.B.) No. 934, H.D. 1, S.D. 1:  1) establishes the Broadband Office 
(BO) within the Office of Enterprise Technology Services; 2) establishes the Broadband 
Revolving Fund (BRF) to be administered by BO for the purposes of supporting 
broadband projects, defraying the cost of internet services, and funding positions for 
personnel to provide technical assistance for the community; 3) repeals Chapter 206S, 
HRS, Section 440G-11.5, HRS, and Section 3 of Act 199, SLH 2010, as amended by 
Section 5 of Act 151, SLH 2011, as amended by Section 2 of Act 23, SLH 2016; 
4) appropriates $200,000 in general funds for FY 26 to be deposited into the BRF; 
5) appropriates $200,000 out of the BRF for FY 26 for reimbursement of contracts 
executed by BO; and 6) appropriates an unspecified amount out of the BRF for FY 26 
for the establishment of an unspecified number of digital navigator positions.  
 
As a matter of general policy, B&F does not support the creation of any revolving 
fund, which does not meet the requirements of Section 37-52.4, HRS.  Revolving funds  
 
 

 
-2- 
 
 
 
should:  1) serve a need as demonstrated by the purpose, scope of work, and an 
explanation why the program cannot be implemented successfully under the general 
fund appropriation process; 2) reflect a clear nexus between the benefits sought and 
charges made upon the users or beneficiaries or a clear link between the program and 
the sources of revenue; 3) provide an appropriate means of financing for the program or 
activity; and 4) demonstrate the capacity to be financially self-sustaining.  Regarding 
H.B. No. 934, H.D. 1, S.D. 1, it is difficult to determine whether the BRF would be 
self-sustaining. 
 
Thank you for your consideration of our comments. 

 
 
STATE OF HAWAII | KA MOKUʻĀINA ʻO HAWAIʻI 
OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
KA ʻOIHANA PILI KĀLEPA 
335 MERCHANT STREET, ROOM 310 
P.O. BOX 541 
HONOLULU, HAWAII 96809 
Phone Number:  (808) 586-2850 
Fax Number:  (808) 586-2856 
cca.hawaii.gov 
 
Testimony of the Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs 
 
Before the  
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
 
Tuesday, April 1, 2025 
10:01 a.m. 
Conference Room 211 & Via Videoconference 
 
On the following measure: 
H.B. 934 HD1 SD1, RELATING TO THE HAWAII BROADBAND  
AND DIGITAL EQUITY OFFICE 
 
Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki, and Members of the Committee: 
 
My name is Randy Leong, and I am the Cable Television Administrator of the 
Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs’ (“Department”) Cable Television 
Division.  The Department supports this bill and requests one amendment.  
 
The purpose of this bill is to transfer the Hawaiʻi Broadband and Digital Equity 
Office (HBDEO) from the Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism 
to the Office of Enterprise Technology Services in the Department of Accounting and 
General Services, rename the HBDEO to Broadband Office, repeal broadband duties 
assigned to the Director of Commerce and Consumer Affairs, repeal the Broadband 
Assistance Advisory Council, establish the Broadband Revolving Fund, establish 
positions, and appropriate funds. 
The Department respectfully requests an amendment to consolidate the duty of 
collecting and posting broadband infrastructure notices pursuant to Section 2 of Act 151 
JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR | KE KIAʻĀINA 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR | KA HOPE KIAʻĀINA 
NADINE Y. ANDO 
DIRECTOR | KA LUNA HOʻOKELE 
 
DEAN I. HAZAMA 
DEPUTY DIRECTOR | KA HOPE LUNA HOʻOKELE 
 
 

(Session Laws of Hawaii 2011), as amended by Act 264 (Session Laws of Hawaii 2013) 
and Act 193 (Session Laws of Hawaii 2016) from the Department to the 
HBDEO/Broadband Office (see attachment, pg.3, line 21). This little-used provision 
requires the Department to post online notices of certain actions relating to broadband 
infrastructure on existing utility poles and conduits which use existing infrastructure and 
facilities. The online notices are for expedited projects which are exempt from county and 
state permitting and approval requirements, so long as 30-days’ notice is provided in 
advance.      
The Department finds it prudent and beneficial to conserve taxpayer resources by 
consolidating broadband and related duties under one state agency.  This would also 
reduce confusion by having one state office in which the public can be referred to and 
contact for broadband issues and matters. Due to changes in broadband infrastructure 
funding and public policy in recent years, the Department has occupied a secondary role 
to other state agencies who are leading broadband infrastructure development and digital 
equity initiatives. As such, the Department supports this measure and our requested 
amendment which is the transfer of duties pursuant to Section 2 of Act 151, as amended, 
from the Department to the HBDEO/Broadband Office. The Department defers to the 
other agencies regarding the other sections of this bill which affect those agencies.               
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this bill. 
 
 
 
 
Attachment to follow 

ATTACHMENT TO DCCA TESTIMONY – WAM HEARING 
(Act 151 Session Laws of Hawaii 2011)  
 
BE IT .ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII: 
1 
SECTION 1. Act 199, Session Laws of Hawaii 2010,  
2 
established a broadband work group to develop procedures for 
3 
streamlining permitting functions applicable to the development 
4 
of broadband services and broadband technology. The legislature 
5 
finds that the broadband work group has recommended the creation 
6 
of an exemption from various permitting requirements for the 
7 
installation of new or upgraded broadband infrastructure along 
8 
existing poles and conduits that are already used for 
9 
telecommunications. Another discussion item of the broadband 
10 
work group is the streamlining of the processing of pole, 
11 
conduit, and duct applications. 
12 
The purpose of this Act is to facilitate the deployment of 
13 
high-speed broadband infrastructure in Hawaii by exempting the 
14 
installation, improvement, construction, or development of 
15 
infrastructure relating to broadband service or broadband 
16 
technology from state and county permitting requirements, under 
17 
certain conditions, and reducing the time and costs associated 
18 
with requests for access to utility poles and conduits. This

Page2 
1342 
 
H.B. NO. 
H.D.1 
S.D.2 
C.D.1 
 
 
1  Act also makes the director of commerce and consumer affairs a 
2- member and chairperson of the broadband assistance advisory 
3 
council and a member and convenor of the broadband work group 
4 
established under Act 199, Session Laws of Hawaii 2010, and 
5 
removes the cable television administrator from the broadband 
6 
assistance advisory council and the broadband work group. 
7 
SECTION 2. From January 1, 2012, to January 1, 2017, 
8 
actions relating to the installation, improvement, construction, 
9 
or development of infrastructure relating to broadband service 
10 
or broadband technology, including the interconnection of 
11 
telecommunications cables, shall be exempt from county 
12 
permitting requirements, state permitting and approval 
13 
requirements, which includes the requirements of chapters 171, 
14. 205A, and 343, Hawaii Revised Statutes, and public utilities 
15 
commission rules under Hawaii Administrative Rules, chapter 6- 
16 
73, that require existing installations to comply with new pole 
17 
replacement standards at the time of any construction or 
18 
alteration to the equipment or installation, except to the 
19 
extent that such permitting or approval is required by federal 
20 
law or is necessary to protect eligibility for federal funding, 
21 
services, or other assistance; provided that the installation, 
 
HB1342 CDl HMS 2011-4055 

Page3 
1342 
 
H.B. NO. 
H.D.1 
S.D.2 
C.D. 1 
 
 
 
1 
improvement, construction, or development of infrastructure 
2 
shall: 
3 
(1)  Be directly related to the improvement of existing 
4 
telecommunications cables or the installation of new 
5 
telecommunications cables: 
6 
(A) On existing or replacement utility poles and 
7 
conduits; and 
8 
(B)  Using existing infrastructure and facilities; 
9 
(2)  Take place within existing rights-of-way or public 
10 
utility easements or use existing telecommunications 
11 
infrastructure; and 
12 
(3) Make no significant changes to the existing public 
13 
rights-of-way, public utility easements, or 
14 
telecommunications infrastructure. 
15 
A person or entity shall use reasonable best efforts to 
16 
comply with all applicable safety and engineering requirements 
17 
relating to the installation, improvement, construction, or 
18 
development of infrastructure relating to broadband service. 
19 
A person or entity taking any action under this section 
20 
shall, at least thirty calendar days before the action is taken, 
21 
provide notice to the [director of commerce and consumer affairs] 
Hawaii broadband digital equity office/Broadband Office  
 
HB1342 CDl HMS 2011-4055 

Page4 
134
 
H.B. NO. 
, H.D.1 
S.D.2 
C.D.1 
 
 
 
1 
by electronic posting in the form and on the site designated by 
 
2 
the director for such posting on the designated central State of 
3 
Hawaii Internet website; provided that notice need not be given 
4 
by a public utility or government entity for an action relating 
5 
to the installation, improvement, construction, or development 
6 
of infrastructure relating to broadband service or broadband 
 
7 
technology where the action taken is to provide access as the 
8 
owner of the existing rights-of-way, utility easements, or 
 
9 
telecommunications infrastructure. 
 
[remaining text omitted] 

 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAI῾I 
                                                       KA MOKU‘ĀINA O HAWAI‘I 
                                 STATE COUNCIL ON DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES 
                                'A'UNIKE MOKU'ĀPUNI NO KA NĀ KĀWAI KULA 
PRINCESS VICTORIA KAMĀMALU BUILDING 
1010 RICHARDS STREET, Room 122 
HONOLULU, HAWAI῾I 96813 
TELEPHONE: (808) 586-8100    FAX: (808) 586-7543 
 
April 1, 2025 
 
The Honorable Senator Donovan M. Dela Cruz, Chair 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
The Thirty-Third Legislature  
State Capitol 
State of Hawai῾i 
Honolulu, Hawai'i 96813 
 
Dear Senator Dela Cruz, and Committee members 
 
SUBJECT: HB934 HD1 SD1 Relating to the Hawai’i Broadband and Digital Equity Office 
 
The Hawai῾i State Council on Developmental Disabilities SUPPORTS HB934 HD1 SD1, which 
transfers the Hawaiʻi Broadband and Digital Equity Office from the Department of Business, Economic 
Development, and Tourism to the Office of Enterprise Technology Services in the Department of 
Accounting and General Services. Renames the Hawaiʻi Broadband and Digital Equity Office to 
Broadband Office. Repeals broadband duties assigned to the Director of Commerce and Consumer 
Affairs. Repeals the Broadband Assistance Advisory Council. Establishes the Broadband Revolving 
Fund. Establishes positions. Appropriates funds. Effective 7/1/3000. (SD1) 
 
Access to broadband and digital technology is critical for individuals with intellectual and 
developmental disabilities (I/DD) to fully participate in society. Reliable internet connectivity and digital 
literacy are essential for accessing telehealth services, engaging in educational opportunities, securing 
employment, and participating in community life. HB934 HD1 SD1 strengthens the State's infrastructure 
to ensure digital equity, especially for underserved and vulnerable populations. 
 
The proposed restructuring and the establishment of the special fund will enhance the State’s 
ability to develop and implement strategies to improve broadband access and affordability. The 
emphasis on supporting broadband projects, and funding positions for technical assistance aligns with 
the needs of the I/DD community, which often faces significant barriers to digital inclusion. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of HB934 HD1 SD1.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Daintry Bartoldus 
Executive Administrator 

 
 
 JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
LT. GOVERNOR 
 
JAMES KUNANE TOKIOKA 
  DIRECTOR 
        
                      DANE K. WICKER 
                                DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF BUSINESS, 
 
 
 
 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT & TOURISM 
 
 
 
    KA ʻOIHANA HOʻOMOHALA PĀʻOIHANA, ʻIMI WAIWAI   
 
 
 
     A HOʻOMĀKAʻIKAʻI 
  
 
 
 
 
No. 1 Capitol District Building, 250 South Hotel Street, 5th Floor, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813 
 
Telephone:  
(808) 586-2355 
 
 
 
 
Mailing Address:  P.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96804 
 
 
 
 
Fax: 
(808) 586-2377 
 
 
 
 
Web site:  dbedt.hawaii.gov 
 
 
Statement of 
JAMES KUNANE TOKIOKA 
Director 
Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism 
before the 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS 
 
Tuesday, April 1, 2025 
Time 10:01AM 
State Capitol, Conference Room #211 
 
In consideration of  
HB934 HD1 SD1 
RELATING TO THE HAWAII BROADBAND AND DIGITAL EQUITY OFFICE.  
 
Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki and members of the Committee.  The 
Department of Business, Economic Development and Tourism (DBEDT) provides the 
following comments on HB934 HD1 SD1 that transfers the Hawaii Broadband and 
Digital Equity Office (HBDEO) to the Office of Enterprise Technology Services in the 
Department of Accounting and General Services.   
HBDEO has provided steady leadership in state broadband and digital equity. I 
am confident that regardless of where the Office resides in state government, the Office 
will continue to provide the necessary leadership and accountability in carrying out its 
statutory responsibilities and in deployment and management of federal funds. DBEDT 
will continue to collaborate with the Office as it is an important piece to the future of 
digital workforce and economic development. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 

JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
    GOVERNOR 
    KE KIAʻĀINA 
 
                              
 
STATE OF HAWAIʻI | KA MOKUʻĀINA O HAWAIʻI 
DEPARTMENT OF ACCOUNTING AND GENERAL SERVICES | KA ʻOIHANA LOIHELU A LAWELAWE LAULĀ 
 
OFFICE OF ENTERPRISE TECHNOLOGY SERVICES | KEʻENA HOʻOLANA ʻENEHANA 
 
P.O. BOX 119, HONOLULU, HAWAII 96810-0119 
 
Testimony of 
CHRISTINE M. SAKUDA 
Chief Information Officer 
Office of Enterprise Technology Services 
 
Before the 
 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS 
Tuesday, April 1, 2025 
 
HOUSE BILL NO. 934 HD1 SD1 
RELATING TO THE HAWAIʻI BROADBAND AND DIGITAL EQUITY OFFICE 
  
Dear Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki, and members of the committee:  
  
The Office of Enterprise Technology Services (ETS) humbly offers comments on this bill 
that transfers the Hawaiʻi Broadband and Digital Equity Office (HBDEO) from the 
Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism to the Office of Enterprise 
Technology Services in the Department of Accounting and General Services (DAGS), 
establishes the Broadband Revolving Fund, and appropriates funds. 
 
ETS strongly supports Connect Kākou, led by Governor Josh Green and Lieutenant 
Governor Sylvia Luke, to ensure that every resident of Hawaiʻi has access to broadband 
Internet – plus the skills and devices they need to use the Internet for economic, social, 
and community prosperity.   
 
Assuming the responsibility of managing the HBDEO is a significant task for ETS. 
Presently, ETS is dedicated to internal government functions such as enterprise IT 
governance, cybersecurity, data governance and sharing, and supporting the state's 
major modernization initiatives. While we are fully committed to ensuring the success of 
this transition, we must emphasize the need for appropriate funding from both state and 
federal sources, as diverting current resources is not feasible given our existing 
commitments. 
 
According to the HBDEO’s original request in the upcoming fiscal 2025-2027 biennium 
budget: “With the current budget of $360,000 to fund four staff and operating expenses, 
HBDEO has been operating with essentially no operating expenses for the past two fiscal 
years. Proper funding will enable the office to meet its objectives, especially in community 
outreach to rural, non-Oahu areas of the state.” 
KEITH A. REGAN 
COMPTROLLER 
KA LUNA HOʻOMALU HANA LAULĀ 
 
CHRISTINE M. SAKUDA 
CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER 
LUNA ʻENEHANA      

H.B. 934, H.D. 1 
Page 2  
 
 
The HBDEO had asked for $777,090 for FY 26 with $452,302 for personal services, and 
$324,788 for other expenses.  
 
ETS believes that these figures provide for a sound budget, and we ask that the HBDEO 
be funded with this amount in the FB2025-2027 biennium budget. We believe that without 
proper funding for both salaries and operations to manage the work the HBDEO is being 
tasked to do, moving the HBDEO to DAGS-ETS would not improve the functioning of the 
HBDEO but would in fact negatively impact critical services delivered through our existing 
program.  
ETS will also incur additional operational and administrative costs associated with 
moving HBDEO’s staff and services under our division and costs for the management of 
the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) grant number 15-31-DS042 
to support work described in the “Hawaiʻi’s National Telecommunications and 
Information Administration (NTIA).” 
Pursuant to Section 27-43, Hawaii Revised Statutes, ETS provides governance and 
strategic planning for executive branch IT projects and we believe managing the 
infrastructure operations of broadband fall within the purview of this office. Our statutory 
responsibilities are focused on the State’s enterprise IT infrastructure which has 
supported departments directly. We have concerns that a lack of adequate resources will 
dilute this internal focus by diverting resources needed for this public outreach. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on this measure. 

 
SYLVIA LUKE 
L I E U T E N A N T  G O V E R N O R  
Ke Keʻena O Ka Hope Kiaʻāina 
 
 
The 33rd Legislature, State of Hawaii 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
April 1, 2025 
 
Testimony on 
H.B. 934 - RELATING TO THE HAWAII BROADBAND AND  
DIGITAL EQUITY OFFICE 
 
Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki, and Members of the Committee: 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in support of H.B. 934, H.D. 1, S.D. 
1 which transfers the Hawaii Broadband Office from the Department of Business, 
Economic Development, and Tourism (DBEDT) to the Office of Enterprise Technology 
Services (ETS) in the Department of Accounting and General Services, establishes a 
revolving fund, and appropriates additional funding. We appreciate the amendments 
made by the Committee on Economic Development and Tourism as reflected in S.D. 1. 
 
Reliable, affordable high speed internet access is essential for ensuring greater 
educational, economic, and social opportunities for all. The federal and state 
governments have committed over $400 million to modernize our subsea and terrestrial 
infrastructure and equip residents with the tools and knowledge to safely navigate the 
internet. With the construction of new subsea broadband infrastructure, our state 
anticipates generating revenue from negotiated lease agreements and the creation of a 
separate fund will ensure these funds are used to reduce the cost of internet services, 
provide technical assistance to communities, and support broadband projects. Given the 
increasingly vital role of broadband in our daily lives, the transfer of the Broadband Office 
from DBEDT to ETS provides an opportunity to review and centralize broadband 
responsibilities currently dispersed across state government. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in support to H.B. 934, H.D. 1, S.D. 1. 
  

UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I SYSTEM 
ʻŌNAEHANA KULANUI O HAWAIʻI   
Legislative Testimony 
Hōʻike Manaʻo I Mua O Ka ʻAhaʻōlelo 
_____________________________________________________________ 
Testimony Presented Before the 
Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
Tuesday, April 1, 2025 at 10:01 a.m. 
By 
Garret T. Yoshimi, Vice President for Information Technology/Chief Information Officer  
University of Hawai‘i System 
HB 934 HD1 SD1 – RELATING TO THE HAWAII BROADBAND AND DIGITAL EQUITY 
OFFICE 
Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki, and Members of the Committee: 
The University of Hawai‘i, representing the interests of the State in the implementation 
of federally funded broadband investments, supports HB 934 HD1 SD1 which transfers 
the Hawai‘i Broadband and Digital Equity Office (HBDEO) from the Department of 
Business, Economic Development, and Tourism (DBEDT) to the Office of Enterprise 
Technology Services (ETS) in the Department of Accounting and General Services, and 
establishes the Hawai‘i Broadband Revolving Fund.  Transfer of the HBDEO under 
ETS, would place it within the management and oversight of the State Chief Information 
Officer, and will properly align the functions of the HBDEO together with other statewide 
technology infrastructure oversight, management and operations.  The measure 
additionally provides for appropriate governance under the statutorily established 
Information Technology Steering Committee. 
Establishment of the Hawai‘i Broadband Revolving Fund provides for the ability to 
collect and expend funds received as a beneficial outcome of the public investment in 
broadband infrastructure assets; and to ensure the funds are used to support long term 
sustainability of the state's broadband infrastructure assets and the ability of our 
community to benefit from those infrastructure assets.  Placing the ownership of the 
assets resulting from the federal broadband investments under the State Chief 
Information Officer, together with the oversight assistance of the Information 
Technology Steering Committee, will help to ensure the public's interest is protected 
and the benefits to Hawai‘i maximized over the lifetime of these assets. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in support of HB 934 HD1 SD1. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Charter Communications  
Testimony of Rebecca Lieberman, Director of Government Affairs 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS 
Hawaii State Capitol 
Tuesday, April 1, 2025 
 
SUPPORT FOR H.B. 934, H.D. 1, S.D. 1 – RELATING TO THE HAWAII BROADBAND AND DIGITAL EQUITY 
OFFICE 
 
Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki, and Members of the Committee. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of  H.B. 934, H.D. 1, S.D. 1, a bill that would 
transfer the Hawaii Broadband and Digital Equity Office (HBDEO) to the Office of Enterprise Technology 
Services and establishes the Broadband Revolving Fund.  
As the largest broadband provider in the state, Charter supports efforts to promote digital equity 
and broadband access. A key aspect of reducing the digital divide is by investing in broadband 
infrastructure, digital navigators and literacy tools, affordability programs, and access to hardware.  
Charter believes that every Hawaii resident should have reliable access to the Internet. We will 
continue to help bring the benefits of broadband and access to the internet to those who need it most. 
Hawaii is slated to receive over $200 million in federal grants for broadband infrastructure in the 
immediate future (via the Broadband, Equity, Access, and Deployment Program), in addition to private 
investments already being made by the industry. The Broadband and Digital Equity Special Fund should 
prioritize funding projects related to broadband adoption and affordability programs, rather than retail 
infrastructure projects, which are separately supported by federal funding.  
We are grateful to Rep Ilagan for incorporating our previously requested amendment into the bill. 
Charter spoke with HBDEO staff, and we believe that the bill, as written, is in line with HBDEO’s goals, 
which is to support community anchor institutions, digital navigators and literacy tools, affordability 
programs, and access to hardware.  
Mahalo for the opportunity to provide proposed amendments to H.B. 934, H.D. 1, S.D. 1.  
 
 

                                                                                                                                                       
86-260 Farrington Highway, Waianae, Hawaii  96792 - Telephone:  (808) 697-3457 - Fax: (808) 697-3687 
Visit our website at:  www.wcchc.com 
 
April 1, 2025 at 10:01AM 
State Capitol, Conference Room 221 & Videoconference 
 
COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS 
To:  
Chair Senator Donovan M. Dela Cruz 
            Vice Chair Sharon Y. Moriwaki 
From: Michele Chrissy Kuahine 
 
Director of Tech Equity 
 
RE:  
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF HOUSE BILL 934 HD1 SD1 - RELATING TO THE 
HAWAII BROADBAND AND DIGITAL EQUITY OFFICE 
 
Aloha Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki, and Members of the Senate Committee on Ways 
and Means, 
The Waianae Coast Comprehensive Health Center (WCCHC) strongly supports, with 
amendments HB934 HD1 SD1, particularly the transition of the Hawaii Broadband and Digital 
Equity Office to the Department of Technology and Innovation. However, we are concerned with 
the language added in the bill’s prior version, in Section 27E Broadband Revolving Fund item 
b1, which reads: 
 
“Supporting broadband projects, excluding the deployment of broadband 
infrastructure for the provision of retail service;” 
 
We respectfully request the removal of this language: “excluding the deployment of 
broadband infrastructure for the provision of retail service;” to restore the bill’s original intent. 
 
The added language conflicts with the State’s objectives and policies outlined in the bill. 
According to Section 27C, the Hawaii Broadband and Digital Equity Office has the duty to: 
 
1. Develop and implement strategies to aggressively increase broadband affordability, 
penetration, and competitive availability in the state; and 
 
2. Support efforts of both public and private entities to enhance or facilitate the deployment 
of broadband services, including competitively priced, advanced electronic 
communications services and internet access services throughout the state. 
 
The language “excluding the deployment of broadband infrastructure for the provision of retail 
service” is unnecessary. Community broadband systems are small-scale and non-competitive to 
fiber ISPs, as evidenced by their exclusion from BEAD funding. These systems serve critical 
gaps where traditional ISPs will not invest, specifically for unsheltered populations and those 
living at or below the poverty level—over 70% of WCCHC's patients. 
 
 

                                                                                                                                                       
86-260 Farrington Highway, Waianae, Hawaii  96792 - Telephone:  (808) 697-3457 - Fax: (808) 697-3687 
Visit our website at:  www.wcchc.com 
Much like our concerns last year with HB2359, where we requested a veto due to similar 
language, the bill in its current form limits broadband deployment to the benefit of private 
interests over the public good, ultimately disadvantaging local communities. 
 
We respectfully urge the committee to remove restrictive language to better align with the 
State’s objectives, ensuring all individuals and communities, particularly those in 
socioeconomically disadvantaged areas, have access to the technology needed to fully 
participate in society, democracy, the economy, and, most importantly, health equity, including 
equitable access to telehealth and healthcare services. 
Mahalo for the opportunity to testify in support with amendments on HB934 HD1 SD1. 

1961 Aamaka Pl. 
Pearl City, HI 96782 
808-462-8356, dancsmith@rocketmail.com 
 
March 30, 2025 
 
 
 
 
Committee on Ways and Means 
The Senate 
Capitol 
Honolulu, Hawaii 
 
Re: Hearing April 1, 2025 on HB934 SD1 
 
Aloha Chair, Vice Chair, and Committee Members: 
 
I write in strong support of HB934 SD1 and the funding level you deem appropriate taking into 
account the requests of the Office of Enterprise Technology Services.  The centralization of 
broadband responsibilities is a smart move. 
 
However, I strongly recommend one amendment.  On Page 6, Line 7, please restore the original 
bill’s language, specifically to say:  
    (1) Supporting broadband projects; 
 
The change in HD1, prohibiting the provision of retail service, was made at the request of Charter 
Communications.  Possible interpretations of Charter’s language could prevent even small, 
innovative projects, such as hybrid fiber-satellite – in remote, unserved or underserved 
communities.  Giant corporation Charter would not be significantly harmed by a modest group of 
homes not being available to them.  Ironically, the language could also prohibit a project that 
delivers customers to Charter.  The concerns of the Waianae Coast Comprehensive Health Center 
are valid, in my opinion 
 
Please pass HB934 SD1, and if you agree, with the recommended restored language as described 
above. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Daniel C. Smith, PhD 
 
 

Testimony of Sean Taketa McLaughlin​
​
​
​
​
​
 
Hawaii' Senate Committee on Ways and Means 
Tuesday April 1, 2025 at 10:01am 
 
Testimony  in SUPPORT of HB934 SD1 RELATING TO THE HAWAII BROADBAND AND 
DIGITAL EQUITY OFFICE. 
 
Aloha Chair Dela Cruz, Vice Chair Moriwaki and Members of the Committee:  
 
Digital equity is about more than internet access.  That is why the State’s efforts to address local 
needs are so important - from Connect Kakou to the Broadband Hui.  The Hawai’i Broadband 
and Digital Equity Office has moved forward with integrity. Boosting their efforts is a worthy goal. 
 
In our information ecosystem, broadband internet service includes our access to dominant 
media platforms and to connections that help us meet our most basic communication needs.  
The Hawai’i Broadband Hui named the local values to guide our efforts as “Digital Pilina,” to 
express the fundamental goal of our collective efforts - connection.   
 
Starting with legacy analog networks to connect individuals with each other - helping us to 
understand the world in our particular cultural and social context.  Nowadays, we also rely upon 
broadband networks for essential information to meet local needs for: public health & safety; 
education; community based economic development; culture & arts; and civic engagement.   
 
Given the history of market failure that has resulted in a “digital divide” and clear inequity, public 
policy must address these needs through Federal, State and local regulatory processes.  This 
bill can help to balance the ledger of corporate profits that come at the expense of local people. 
 
Increasingly, networks are not locally owned, not transparent, not accountable and not 
effectively regulated by the Federal, State or County governments.  The original social contracts 
these networks had negotiated with the State through regulatory processes of the Public Utilities 
Commission (PUC), and the Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs (DCCA) included 
universal service obligations, consumer protections and public interest benefits to ensure that 
local needs and interests were met with reliable, ethical and affordable services.  Today, just a 
hollowing shell of that social contract remains - with consumer protections and public interests 
unrepresented and largely forgotten. 
 
A glance at the statutory obligations of DCCA that are being stricken by HB934 clearly shows 
the abject failure of DCCA to fulfill their duties to consumers and the public interest.  So, this 
reform of State efforts is more important than it appears and clearly just a first step in a long 
process to reclaim the integrity of Hawaii’s information ecosystem.  
 
Sean Taketa McLaughlin 
seantaketa@gmail.com, C: 808-595-4877 
