SSCR1126
STAND. COM. REP. NO.
1126
Honolulu,
Hawaii
RE:
H.B. No. 934
H.D. 1
S.D. 1
Honorable Ronald D. Kouchi
President of the Senate
Thirty-Third State Legislature
Regular Session of 2025
State of Hawaii
Sir:
Your Committee on
Economic Development and Tourism, to which was referred H.B. No. 934,
H.D. 1, entitled:
"A BILL FOR AN ACT RELATING TO THE HAWAII BROADBAND
AND DIGITAL EQUITY OFFICE,"
begs leave to report as follows:
The
purpose and intent of this measure is to:
(1)
Transfer the Hawaii Broadband and Digital
Equity Office from the Department of Business, Economic Development, and
Tourism to the Office of Enterprise Technology Services in the Department of
Accounting and General Services
;
(2)
Establish
the Broadband and Digital Equity Special Fund
; and
(3)
Appropriate
funds.
Your
Committee received testimony in support of this measure from the Office of the
Lieutenant Governor, Department of Commerce and Comsumer Affairs, University of
Hawai
ʻ
i System, Hawai
ʻ
i
State Council on Developmental Disabilities, Kapolei Chamber of Commerce,
Waianae Coast Comprehensive Health Center, Charter Communications, and four
individuals.
Your Committee
received comments on this measure from
the
Office of Enterprise Technology Services; Department of Business, Economic
Development, and Tourism
; and Hawaiian Telcom.
Your Committee
finds that
given
the increasingly vital role of broadband technology in daily life, providing
reliable and affordable access to high speed internet is essential to create
equitable educational, economic, and social opportunities throughout the State
.
Your Committee further finds that the federal
government and the State have committed to modernize subsea and terrestrial
infrastructure and equip residents with the tools and knowledge to safely
navigate the internet.
With the
construction of new subsea broadband infrastructure, the State anticipates
generating revenue from negotiated lease agreements and the creation of a
separate fund will ensure these funds are used to reduce the cost of internet
services, provide technical assistance to communities, and support broadband
projects.
Your Committee
notes the concerns raised in the testimony of the Waianae Coast Comprehensive
Health Center regarding the exclusion of broadband infrastructure for retail
services under the State's digital equity goals to support local community-led
broadband solutions.
Your Committee
further finds that this measure is intended to provide the opportunity to
review and centralize broadband responsibilities currently dispersed across the
state government.
Your Committee
acknowledges the suggested amendments provided by the Office of the Lieutenant
Governor regarding methods to most effectively use funding and anticipated
generated revenue while consolidating statewide broadband infrastructure.
Accordingly, your
Committee has amended this measure by:
(1)
Changing the name of the "Hawaii
Broadband and Digital Equity Office" to "Broadband Office";
(2)
Deleting language that
would have
included "remote work" within the duties and
responsibilities of the broadband office;
(3)
Changing the "Broadband and Digital
Equity Special Fund" to the "Broadband Revolving Fund";
(4)
Repealing
language in existing law that assigned duties to the Director of Commerce and
Consumer Affairs relating to broadband services;
(5)
Repealing
language that established the Broadband Assistance Advisory Council;
(6)
Changing the appropriation from an unspecified
amount
,
to $200,000 to be expended
by the Broadband Office for the reimbursement of contracts executed by the Broadband
Office;
(7)
Inserting a blank appropriation amount to
establish a blank number of digital navigator positions; and
(8)
Making technical, nonsubstantive amendments
for the purposes of clarity and consistency.
As affirmed by the
record of votes of the members of your Committee on Economic Development and
Tourism that is attached to this report, your Committee is in accord with the
intent and purpose of H.B. No. 934, H.D. 1, as amended herein, and
recommends that it pass Second Reading in the form attached hereto as H.B.
No. 934, H.D. 1, S.D. 1, and be referred to your Committee on
Ways and Means.
Respectfully submitted on behalf
of the members of the Committee on Economic Development and Tourism,
________________________________
LYNN
  DECOITE, Chair