    JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
             GOVERNOR 
             KE KIAʻĀINA 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAIʻI | KA MOKUʻĀINA ʻO HAWAIʻI 
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION | KA ʻOIHANA ALAKAU 
869 PUNCHBOWL STREET 
HONOLULU, HAWAII 96813-5097 
EDWIN H. SNIFFEN 
DIRECTOR 
KA LUNA HOʻOKELE 
 
Deputy Directors 
Nā Hope Luna Hoʻokele 
DREANALEE K. KALILI 
TAMMY L. LEE 
CURT T. OTAGURO 
ROBIN K. SHISHIDO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
February 12, 2025 
2:00 p.m. 
State Capitol, Room 325 VC 
 
H.B. 990 
RELATING TO MAKING APPROPRIATIONS FOR CLAIMS AGAINST THE STATE, 
ITS OFFICERS, OR ITS EMPLOYEES 
 
House Committee on Judiciary 
 
The Department of Transportation (DOT) supports H.B. 990 that authorizes judgements 
and settlements for claims against the State. 
 
We want to thank the State AG office for all their support and hard work on completing 
these cases for the DOT. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony.  
 

TESTIMONY OF 
THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL 
KA ‘OIHANA O KA LOIO KUHINA 
THIRTY-THIRD LEGISLATURE, 2025 
 
 
ON THE FOLLOWING MEASURE: 
H.B. NO. 990, MAKING APPROPRIATIONS FOR CLAIMS AGAINST THE STATE, ITS 
OFFICERS, OR ITS EMPLOYEES. 
 
BEFORE THE: 
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY & HAWAIIAN AFFAIRS  
 
DATE: 
Wednesday, February 12, 2025 
TIME:  2:00 p.m. 
LOCATION: State Capitol, Room 325 
TESTIFIER(S): 
Anne E. Lopez, Attorney General, or  
Skyler G. Cruz, Deputy Attorney General 
 
 
Chair Tarnas and Members of the Committee: 
The Department of the Attorney General (Department) supports this bill. 
The purpose of this bill is to seek appropriations to satisfy claims against the 
State, its officers, or its employees, including claims for legislative relief, judgments 
against the State, settlements, and miscellaneous claims. 
The bill contains eight claims that total $2,338,335.75.  To satisfy this total 
amount, the following appropriations are needed: 
• An appropriation in the amount of $998,335.75, allocated among five 
claims to be paid from the general fund; and 
• An appropriation in the amount of $1,340,000.00, allocated among three 
claims to be paid from departmental funds. 
Attachment "A" provides a brief description of each claim in this bill. 
Since the bill was introduced, nine new claims were resolved that total 
$3,572,898.47.  To satisfy these additional claims, the Department requests that the bill 
be amended to increase the requested appropriation by the amount of $3,572,898.47, 
allocated among nine claims to be paid from the general fund. 
Attachment "B" provides a brief description of the new claims. 

Testimony of the Department of the Attorney General 
Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 
Page 2 of 8 
 
Including the new claims, the appropriation request totals $5,911,234.22 
allocated among seventeen claims, with the updated appropropriation request as 
follows: 
• An appropriation in the amount of $4,571,234.22, allocated among 
fourteen claims to be paid from the general fund; and 
• An appropriation in the amount of $1,340,000.00, allocated among three 
claims to be paid from departmental funds. 
The Department has a longstanding policy of advising agencies as to how to 
avoid claims such as those in this bill.  The Department has complied with section 37-
77.5, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS), which requires the Attorney General to develop 
and implement a procedure for advising our client agencies on how to avoid future 
claims. 
We respectfully request passage of this bill with amendments to add the new 
claims. 
 
 

Testimony of the Department of the Attorney General 
Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 
Page 3 of 8 
 
ATTACHMENT “A” 
 
DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES: 
 
Jennifer Reber v. State of Hawaii 
 
 
$  450,000.00 (General Fund) 
Civil No. 5CCV-23-0000053, Fifth Circuit 
 
      Settlement 
 
On May 20, 2021, Plaintiff Jennifer Reber (Reber) slipped and fell onto a piece of rebar 
protruding from the ground while hiking on a trail leading to Waipoo Falls, which is 
located at Kokee and Waimea Canyon State Park on Kauai, Hawaii.  The rebar spike 
impaled Reber’s lower right thigh.  First responders transported Reber to the nearest 
hospital where she was treated and released.  After returning to her home in Utah, 
Reber underwent reconstructive surgery and physical therapy. 
 
Brenda Osmer 
 
 
 
 
 
$  100,000.00 (General Fund) 
Tort Claim  
 
 
 
 
 
      Settlement 
 
Brenda Osmer (Osmer) was visiting Waimea Canyon State Park on June 15, 2023.  
She was with her husband when they headed down the walkway from the Waimea 
Canyon lookout.  Around the middle of the walkway, Osmer slipped on a steel diamond 
plate that was covering a small drainage ditch.  Osmer fell and fractured her femur in 
the mid-thigh area of her right leg.  According to Osmer, her husband, and two 
witnesses, there was a light sprinkling of rain prior to the incident.  The two witnesses 
provided a statement that another person had fallen in the same area right before this 
incident.  Osmer was taken by ambulance to the Wilcox Medical Center.  Surgery was 
done the following day where a metal plate and screws were used to repair the fracture.  
The Department of Land and Natural Resources had no notice of anyone falling on the 
steel plate prior to June 15, 2023.  After this incident, the steel plate was coated with a 
paint and sand mixture to make it less slippery and anti-slip tape was applied to the top 
of the steel plate to make it safer. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION: 
 
Juan Jimmie Aldeguer v. State of Hawaii 
 
$ 1,075,000.00 (Dept. Appropriation) 
Civil No. 1CCV-21-0000052, First Circuit 
 
      Settlement 
 
This case arises out of a pedestrian and motor vehicle accident that occurred on 
January 18, 2019, at approximately 6:36 p.m. at the Farrington Highway and Linakola 
Street intersection crosswalk in Maili along the west coast of Oahu.  Juan Jimmie Lee 
Wills-Aldeguer, Jr., and his female companion entered the crosswalk from the parking 
lot of the Maili-Pink Market located on mauka side of the highway and were walking 
toward the Maili Beach Park when they were struck by a northbound-Waianae-bound 
vehicle.  Mr. Wills-Aldeguer landed over the center line where he was then struck by a 
southbound-Honolulu-bound vehicle.  Mr. Wills-Aldeguer died as the result of the 
injuries he sustained in the accident.  The driver of the northbound vehicle settled with 

Testimony of the Department of the Attorney General 
Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 
Page 4 of 8 
 
Plaintiff, the decedent's father.  The driver of the southbound vehicle is a Japanese 
national against whom Plaintiff obtained default.  The complaint alleged, among other 
things, that the crosswalk presented a hazard to pedestrians, and that the Department 
of Transportation (DOT) was negligent in the design and maintenance of the crosswalk.  
Prior to the subject accident, DOT had its private engineering consultant study 
pedestrian safety along the Farrington Highway corridor from the Kahe Power Plant to 
the end of Makaha.  In April 2017, DOT's consultant determined that there were thirteen 
marked but unsignalized crosswalks in the corridor, including the subject crosswalk.  
Many of these crosswalks had between one to three prior crossing accidents and had 
very low pedestrian usage.  The consultant recommended that the crosswalks be 
removed as part of a comprehensive redesign and resurfacing the corridor that would 
also include the consolidation and relocations of some bus stops and bus stop facilities.  
Because of the comprehensive scope of the project and the traffic control-contra-flow 
necessary during construction, the project was divided into Phases 1 and 2.  Phase 1 
included the Nakakuli area.  Phase 2 included the Maili, Waianae, and Makaha areas, 
including the Farrington Highway and Linakola Street intersection site of the accident.  
Phase 1 began in 2018.  Phase 2 began after the completion of Phase 1.  The subject 
accident occurred while work on Phase 1 was being completed and before work on 
Phase 2 had begun. 
 
Estate of Bruce Perdue v. State of Hawaii 
 
$  175,000.00 (Dept. Appropriation) 
Civil No. 5CC131000351, Fifth Circuit  
 
      Settlement 
 
This case arises out of a single motor vehicle accident that occurred in the early 
morning hours on May 21, 2012, in Kapaa, Lihue, Kauai.  Bruce Perdue was driving 
north on the Kuhio Highway toward Kapaa town when he was involved in an accident.  
The post-accident police investigation indicated that, as he approached Mile Post 7, Mr. 
Perdue was driving in excess of the posted speed when he drove off the travel portion 
of the highway, off the paved shoulder, and struck a utility pole.  He died as the result of 
the injuries he sustained in the accident.  At the time of his death, he was employed with 
the National Guard.  Plaintiffs include Mr. Perdue's parents and two siblings, in addition 
to the estate.  The State of Hawaii (State) owns Kuhio Highway.  Kauaʻi Island Utility 
Cooperative and Hawaiian Telcom owned the utility pole.  Plaintiffs sued the State for 
negligent design and operation of the highway and for maintenance of hazards 
conditions on the highway including the utility pole.  Plaintiffs dismissed their claims 
against the utility companies.  The subject utility pole was within the State's highway 
right-of-way/paved shoulder.  Plaintiffs' experts opined that the shoulder should have 
been free of hazardous conditions such as the utility pole, that the State should have 
moved the subject pole after two prior utility pole accidents, had a guardrail installed 
along the highway to prevent vehicles from striking the pole, and/or used other traffic 
control devices such as plastic delineators to highlight the presence of the pole.  The 
State's experts opined that the highway was designed in conformance with applicable 
engineering guidelines, that guardrail installation might increase the occurrence of 
different types of accidents at the site, and that the entire utility line and a number of 

Testimony of the Department of the Attorney General 
Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 
Page 5 of 8 
 
poles along the line would need to be re-designed and relocated by the utility 
companies in order to relocate the subject pole. 
 
STATE OF HAWAII JUDICIARY: 
 
Leanne Rosa v. Randall G.B. Valenciano 
 
$   90,000.00 (Dept. Appropriation) 
Civil No. 23-CV-00315-JAO-WRP, USDC 
 
      Settlement 
 
Plaintiff Leanne Rosa (Rosa) was at all relevant times a judicial assistant at the Fifth 
Circuit Court, State of Hawaii.  Rosa brought a lawsuit against Chief Judge Randal G.B. 
Valenciano (Judge Valenciano) alleging that he subjected her to unwanted "hugs" in 
2015 and during 2018 through 2023.  Rosa asserted a claim under Title VII and/or 42 
U.S.C. § 2000e and state law claims of Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress and 
Negligence. 
 
MISCELLANEOUS CLAIMS: 
 
Maui Kupono Builders, LLC 
 
 
 
$  442,504.75 (General Fund) 
(Check No. S0057589) 
 
Claimant requests reissuance of an outdated check that was misplaced or lost.  The 
legislative claim was filed with the Attorney General within six years from the date on 
which the claim for payment matured, within the period specified by section 37-77, HRS, 
or claimant has shown good cause for any delay. 
 
Sarah Ann D. Pacheco   
 
 
 
$      460.00 (General Fund) 
f/k/a Sarah Ann D. Taylor 
 
Claimant requests reissuance of an outdated check that was misplaced or lost.  The 
legislative claim was filed with the Attorney General within six years from the date on 
which the claim for payment matured, within the period specified by section 37-77, HRS, 
or claimant has shown good cause for any delay. 
 
Kiyoji Tanimura 
 
 
 
 
 
$      5,371.00 (General Fund) 
 
Claimant requests reissuance of an outdated check that was misplaced or lost.  The 
legislative claim was filed with the Attorney General within six years from the date on 
which the claim for payment matured, within the period specified by section 37-77, HRS, 
or claimant has shown good cause for any delay. 
 
 

Testimony of the Department of the Attorney General 
Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 
Page 6 of 8 
 
ATTACHMENT “B” 
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL: 
 
Billy Peter v. Anne E. Lopez 
 
 
 
$   28,500.00 (General Fund) 
Civil No. 24-cv-00508 MWJS-RT, USDC 
 
      Settlement 
 
Plaintiff Billy Peter (Peter) is a citizen of the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM).  He 
resides in the United States pursuant to the Compact of Free Association (COFA) 
between the United States and FSM.  Peter sought a permit to acquire a firearm, but 
was informed by the Honolulu Police Department that he could not be issued a firearm 
permit because of his immigration status as a COFA migrant.  Peter then filed a lawsuit 
asserting that section 134-2(d)(1), HRS, violates the Second Amendment and the Equal 
Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the extent that it prohibits COFA 
migrants from acquiring or possessing firearms on the basis of their COFA status.  The 
parties agreed to a stipulated judgment. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE: 
 
James Sean Shields v. State of Hawaii 
 
$  275,000.00 (General Fund) 
Civil No. 18-1-1897-11 VLC, First Circuit 
 
      Settlement 
 
During a drill on January 13, 2018, an employee of the Hawaii Emergency Management 
Agency (HI-EMA), a division of the State’s Department of Defense, mistakenly sent a 
text message alert to cellular phones across the State warning of an incoming ballistic 
missile threat.  Shortly after receiving this alert, Plaintiff James Sean Shields (Shields) 
had a cardiac episode, which required surgery and hospitalization.  Shields’ girlfriend, 
Plaintiff Brenda Reichel, was with Shields at the time he received the text message alert 
and experienced the cardiac episode.  Plaintiffs alleged gross negligence against the 
State and certain HI-EMA employees. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION: 
 
B.R., M.A., and F.R. v. State of Hawaii  
 
$  330,000.00 (General Fund) 
Civil No. 1CCV-20-0000549, First Circuit 
 
      Settlement 
 
Plaintiffs B.R., M.A., and F.R. sued the Department of Education (DOE) seeking 
damages for gross negligence pursuant to section 657-1.8, HRS, alleging that the DOE 
failed to protect them from sexual abuse perpetrated by a school security guard while 
they were students at the Highlands Intermediate School in the mid-1970s.  The 
security guard led and supervised two school programs, an "Indian Dance Program" 
and a "Campus Police Officer Program."  Both programs included activities conducted 
at the Highlands Intermediate School premises as well as activities conducted off-
campus with the permission of DOE.  The Plaintiffs alleged that the school security 
guard sexually assaulted them and other students on and off-campus during their 

Testimony of the Department of the Attorney General 
Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 
Page 7 of 8 
 
participation in these programs.  Plaintiffs B.R. and M.A. settled their claims in this 
lawsuit.  Plaintiff F.R. voluntarily dismissed his claims before the case settled. 
 
Child Evangelism Fellowship of Hawaii, Inc. v. 
Hawaii State Department of Education 
 
$  100,000.00 (General Fund) 
Civil No. 24-cv-00034 MWJS-WRP, USDC 
 
      Settlement 
 
This lawsuit was filed by Child Evangelism Fellowship of Hawaii, Inc. (CEF) against the 
Department of Education (DOE) alleging violations of the Free Exercise clause in the 
First Amendment and the Equal Protection clause in the Fourteenth Amendment to the 
United States Constitution.  CEF is a Christian, nonprofit organization that uses DOE 
facilities pursuant to chapter 8-39, Hawaii Administrative Rules, to host its after-school 
Good News Clubs.  Unlike other similarly situated organizations, the DOE required CEF 
to pay rental fees to use DOE facilities.  As a result of this lawsuit, the DOE has agreed 
to stop charging CEF rental fees. 
 
Brenda Persinger, Individually and as a 
 
$    1,750,000.00 (General Fund) 
Personal Representative of the Estate of 
 
      Settlement 
Michael Ambrose, Deceased v. State of Hawaii, 
Department of Education 
Civil No. 3CCV-22-0000337, First Circuit 
 
On June 13, 2022, a Department of Education (DOE) special education teacher was 
asked by her supervisor to bring supplies from a DOE office to a park to help set up a 
DOE-run summer camp for special needs students.  The teacher was driving to the park 
along Highway 19 on Hawaii Island when she realized that she had missed her turn.  
The teacher then made a turn on the highway crossing over the double yellow line to 
head back in the other direction.  Although the teacher had intended to make a U-turn, 
the highway was too narrow.  Unable to complete the U-turn, the teacher then had to 
make a three-point turn, which caused her vehicle to partially block both lanes of the 
highway.  At this time, a motorcyclist who was traveling on the highway struck the 
teacher's vehicle and died as a result of the accident.  Police found the teacher at fault.  
The motorcyclist's widow filed a wrongful death lawsuit against the teacher and the DOE 
alleging that the teacher negligently caused the accident while in the course and scope 
of her employment for the DOE and that the DOE was vicariously liable for the teacher's 
negligence. 
 
Jake Ferreira v. State of Hawaii, 
 
 
$   75,000.00 (General Fund) 
Department of Education  
 
  
 
      Settlement 
Civil No. 1CCV-23-0000874, First Circuit 
 
       
 
On October 22, 2021, Plaintiff Jake Ferreira (Ferreira) was a student at Castle High 
School.  That day, Ferreira and another student were asked by a DOE teacher to assist 
with setting up a mechanical log splitter during an agriculture class.  The log splitter was 
going to be used to split wood for the school's annual Thanksgiving imu fundraiser.  

Testimony of the Department of the Attorney General 
Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 
Page 8 of 8 
 
While Ferreira and the other student were attempting to set-up the log splitter, Ferreira's 
left pinky finger got caught in a pinch point on the machine causing his finger to be 
severed.  Ferreira filed a lawsuit against the DOE and the teacher alleging that their 
negligent actions and/or omissions caused Ferreira's injury. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF LAW ENFORCEMENT: 
 
Cresencia Espejo v. State of Hawaii 
 
 
$  750,000.00 (General Fund) 
Civil No. 1CCV-21-0000192, First Circuit 
 
      Settlement 
 
On February 18, 2019, Defendant Deputy Sheriff Gregory Bergman (Deputy Bergman) 
was patrolling the Hawaii State Capitol grounds when he encountered Delmar Espejo 
(Espejo) drinking vodka in public in violation of state law.  Espejo refused to comply with 
Bergman’s requests to pour out the vodka.  A physical altercation ensued, which led to 
Deputy Bergman fatally shooting Espejo.  Espejo’s estate, mother, brothers, and sister 
brought this lawsuit against Deputy Bergman and the State asserting state law claims 
and civil rights claims pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983.  Plaintiffs alleged that Deputy 
Bergman’s use of force against Espejo was excessive force and the State did not 
properly train or supervise Deputy Bergman. 
 
MISCELLANEOUS CLAIMS: 
 
Mark Lloyd  
 
 
 
 
 
$      111,733.08 (General Fund) 
 
Claimant requests reissuance of an outdated check that was misplaced or lost.  The 
legislative claim was filed with the Attorney General within six years from the date on 
which the claim for payment matured, within the period specified by section 37-77, HRS, 
or claimant has shown good cause for any delay. 
 
Maui Kupono Builders, LLC 
 
 
 
$       152,665.39 (General Fund) 
(Check No. S0001176) 
 
Claimant requests reissuance of an outdated check that was misplaced or lost.  The 
legislative claim was filed with the Attorney General within six years from the date on 
which the claim for payment matured, within the period specified by section 37-77, HRS, 
or claimant has shown good cause for any delay. 

STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND FINANCE 
Ka ʻOihana Mālama Mo‘ohelu a Kālā 
P.O. BOX 150 
HONOLULU, HAWAI‘I  96810-0150 
 
 
 
JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
LUIS P. SALAVERIA 
GOVERNOR 
DIRECTOR 
 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
 
SABRINA NASIR 
LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR 
DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADMINISTRATIVE AND RESEARCH OFFICE 
EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM 
 
BUDGET, PROGRAM PLANNING AND MANAGEMENT DIVISION 
HAWAI‘I EMPLOYER-UNION HEALTH BENEFITS TRUST FUND 
 
FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION DIVISION 
OFFICE OF THE PUBLIC DEFENDER 
 
OFFICE OF FEDERAL AWARDS MANAGEMENT 
 
 
 
 
No. 1 Capitol District Building, 250 S. Hotel Street, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813 
 
WRITTEN ONLY 
TESTIMONY BY LUIS P. SALAVERIA 
DIRECTOR, DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND FINANCE 
TO THE HOUSE COMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY AND HAWAIIAN AFFAIRS 
ON 
HOUSE BILL NO. 990 
 
February 12, 2025 
2:00 p.m. 
Room 325 and Videoconference 
 
 
MAKING APPROPRIATIONS FOR CLAIMS AGAINST THE STATE, ITS 
OFFICERS, OR ITS EMPLOYEES 
 
The Department of Budget and Finance (B&F) supports this Administration bill 
but offers a technical amendment to add an expenditure ceiling declaration clause 
because the general fund expenditure ceiling for FY 25 has already been exceeded. 
 
House Bill (H.B.) No. 990 makes appropriations and approves payments for 
claims against the State, its officers, and its employees.  B&F suggests that H.B. 
No. 990 be amended by adding a new section as follows: 
 
“SECTION __.  In accordance with section 9 of article VII of the Constitution of 
the State of Hawaii and sections 37-91 and 37-93, Hawaii Revised Statutes, the 
legislature has determined that the state general fund expenditure ceiling for fiscal 
year 2024-2025 has already been exceeded by $8,551,795, or 1 per cent.  In addition, 
the appropriations contained in this Act will cause the state general fund expenditure 
ceiling for fiscal year 2024-2025 to be further exceeded by $__________, or 
__ per cent.  The reasons for exceeding the general fund expenditure ceiling are that 
the appropriation made in this Act is necessary to serve the public interest and to meet 
the needs addressed by this Act.” 
 
Thank you for your consideration of our comments. 
