
Rule 13. Standing Committees: General Responsibility; Special Responsibility
13.1. Standing Committees: General Responsibility. It shall be the duty of each
standing committee to:
(1) Consider all bills, petitions, and resolutions as may properly come
before it;
(2) Review those portions of the State's program and financial plan and
variance reports as may relate to programs over which the committee
has primary responsibility. Through informational briefings, it shall
gather information and examine those portions of the executive budget
and the General and Supplemental Appropriations Bills relating to such
programs and recommend to the Committee on Finance the programs
and amounts to be spent thereon (The executive budget and the
General and Supplemental Appropriations Bills are hereinafter
collectively referred to as the "State budget."). The recommended
programs and amounts, taken as a whole, shall be consistent with and
within the expenditure amounts allocated by the Committee on
Finance;
(3) Determine the objectives of any bill referred to it and make appropriate
recommendations, including, if proper, expenditure recommendations
on other bills referred to it by the House. Such expenditure
recommendations shall be consistent with the allocations established
by the Committee on Finance. On bills that relate to programs and
matters over which a standing committee to which they are referred
has no primary responsibility, the standing committee shall propose no
substantive change to the bill unless prior concurrence of the chair of
the committee which has the primary responsibility is first obtained. If
the chair of the standing committee, which has primary responsibility
over programs and matters of a bill, does not concur with the
substantive change to the bill affecting such programs and matters
sought to be proposed by a standing committee, any of the chairs of
the standing committees involved may submit the matter to the
Speaker for resolution. The Speaker shall meet with the chairs of the
standing committees involved, hear their differences, and settle their
differences with a decision, which shall be the final disposition of the
matter; and
(4) Review how programs over which it has primary responsibility have
been carried out in compliance with legislative direction and whether
studies, analysis, and audit should be conducted on all or part of the
program in order to define issues and recommend improvements.
Each standing committee shall also recommend amendments to
existing appropriation acts and may further recommend revenue
measures and improvements to the State's planning, programming,
budgeting, and evaluation system to the Committee on Finance.