JOSH GREEN M.D. 
GOVERNOR 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
LT. GOVERNOR 
STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
DEPARTMENT OF TAXATION 
Ka ‘Oihana ‘Auhau 
P.O. BOX 259 
HONOLULU, HAWAI‘I 96809 
PHONE NO: (808) 587-1540 
FAX NO: (808) 587-1560 
GARY S. SUGANUMA 
DIRECTOR  
 
KRISTEN M.R. SAKAMOTO 
DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF 
GARY S. SUGANUMA, DIRECTOR OF TAXATION 
 
 
TESTIMONY ON THE FOLLOWING MEASURE: 
H.B. No. 933, Relating to General Excise Tax Reductions. 
 
BEFORE THE: 
House Committee on Human Services & Homelessness 
 
 
DATE: 
 
Thursday, January 30, 2025 
TIME:  
 
9:35 a.m. 
LOCATION:  
State Capitol, Room 329 
 
 
Chair Marten, Vice-Chair Olds, and Members of the Committee: 
 
The Department of Taxation (DOTAX) offers the following comments regarding 
H.B. 933 for your consideration. 
 
Section 2 of H.B. 933 adds two new sections to chapter 237, Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS). The first proposed section beginning on page 3 imposes a reduced 
general excise tax (GET) rate on the proceeds received from the sale of groceries 
eligible for purchase under the supplemental nutrition assistance program (SNAP) and 
special supplemental nutrition program for women, infants, and children (WIC) within 
the State, regardless of the means of purchase and the eligibility of the purchaser for 
the SNAP and WIC programs. The reduced rate is one-half percent less than the rate 
applied under section 237-13, HRS (4%). 
 
The bill requires DOTAX to consult with the federal Food and Nutrition Service of 
the United States Department of Agriculture to determine if further definition of the term 
“groceries” is needed.  
 
The next proposed section beginning on page 4 imposes a reduced GET rate on 
the gross proceeds or income received from the sale of nonprescription drugs. The 
reduced rate is one-half percent less than the rate applied under section 237-13, HRS 
(4%). 
\__\\_‘\\Jm|Nl
___ﬁT’
O‘-§ AW'I
____‘nv\\
‘
‘_I__
Vkill’
F4.u$1”
0_9,?
”___M/_'_m‘
M3
E5“
‘*1___mA;_
H
MW:
W\_AK_
‘ [gm
3
”€_“_____‘U_
iv,‘
%‘__
,ﬂM"__‘__‘_
|¥__
_!~»_>_
_&%‘___
“_M%_;"__‘mg_
$%___

Department of Taxation Testimony 
H.B. 933 
January 30, 2025 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
 
Section 3 of the bill requires the Department of Business, Economic 
Development, and Tourism (DBEDT) to conduct an economic cost-benefit analysis on 
the general excise tax reductions in section 2 of the bill. 
 
The measure has an effective date of July 1, 2025. 
 
DOTAX notes that the measure may complicate reporting for taxpayers and 
businesses, who will likely need to track and report receipts of sales subject to the 
proposed reduced rates separately from sales subject to the normal 4% rate. 
 
DOTAX also requests the measure take effect on January 1, 2027 to allow for 
form and instruction changes necessary to implement the proposed reduced rates for 
sales of eligible groceries and nonprescription drugs. This would also allow taxpayers, 
particularly businesses, to update their accounting systems to comply with the changes 
in this measure. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments on this measure.  
 

 
 
   
 
 
 
Date: January 30, 2025  
 
Subject: Hawaiʻi Foodbank in Support of HB 933 Relating to General Excise Tax Reduction 
 
Aloha Chair Marten, Vice Chair Olds, and members of the committee,  
 
On behalf of Hawaiʻi Foodbank, I express our support for HB 933, Relating General Excise Tax 
Reduction. This bill reduces the general excise tax rate on the gross proceeds or income from the sale 
of groceries that are eligible under the supplemental nutrition assistance program (SNAP) or special 
supplemental nutrition program for women, infants, and children (WIC), regardless of the means of 
purchase and the program eligibility of the purchaser; reduces the general excise tax rate on the gross 
proceeds or income from the sale of nonprescription drugs; and requires DBEDT to conduct an 
economic cost-beneﬁt analysis on the GET reductions. 
 
As the state’s largest hunger-relief organization, Hawai‘i Foodbank has been committed to ensuring 
no one in Hawai‘i goes hungry since 1983. We work with over 225 agency partners on Oʻahu and Kauaʻi 
to distribute food, and programs like Food 4 Keiki and ‘Ohana Produce Plus provide nutritious meals 
to children and families. In addition to addressing daily needs, our organization mobilizes during 
emergencies to provide immediate relief and aid long-term recovery efforts. 
 
Food insecurity is a growing crisis in Hawai‘i, with nearly 1 in 3 households struggling to access 
adequate food. One in ten households go a whole day without food some or most months. The recent 
2024 ALICE in Hawai‘i report, released by Aloha United Way, underscores the broader economic 
challenges fueling food insecurity. 40% of Hawai‘i’s families are at the ALICE  (asset-limited, income-
constrained, employed) threshold or below. These households live paycheck to paycheck, and nearly 
half of those below the ALICE threshold face food insecurity. Taxing the sale of groceries 
disproportionately impacts these families, affecting not only the amount of food that Hawai‘i families 
can afford, but also the quality and diversity of their food choices. 
 
Reducing the amount of money families must spend to purchase healthy, adequate food is a critical 
step in the ﬁght against hunger and we urge you to consider this important measure.   
 
With aloha,   
  
Amy Miller   
President and CEO, Hawai‘i Foodbank   
 
A
m
R
E
M
A
“Wm
Q
 0
/V5/

 
 
 
    
 
 
 
Hawai‘i Pacific Health  |  55 Merchant Street  |  Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96813 
Thursday, January 30, 2025, at 9:35 AM  
Via Video Conference; Conference Room 329 
 
House Committee on Human Services & Homelessness 
 
To:  
Representative Lisa Martin, Chair 
        
Representative Ikaika Olds, Vice Chair 
 
From: Michael Robinson 
 
Vice President, Government Relations & Community Affairs 
 
Re:     Testimony in Support of HB 933 
Relating To General Excise Tax Reductions  
 
 
My name is Michael Robinson, and I am the Vice President of Government Relations & 
Community Affairs at Hawai‘i Pacific Health. Hawai‘i Pacific Health is a not-for-profit 
health care system comprised of its four medical centers – Kapi‘olani, Pali Momi, Straub 
and Wilcox and over 70 locations statewide with a mission of creating a healthier Hawai‘i. 
 
HPH writes in SUPPORT of HB 933 which reduces the general excise tax rate on the 
gross proceeds or income from the sale of groceries that are eligible under the 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) or Special Supplemental Nutrition 
Program for women, infants, and children (WIC).  The measure also reduces the general 
excise tax rate on the gross proceeds or income from the sale of nonprescription drugs.  
 
HPH has long recognized the relationship between healthy outcomes and food security, 
as well as the strong connection between access to healthy foods with health and 
wellness.  HPH screens our in-patients across our facilities for indications of food 
insecurity and is acutely aware of the challenge it is for our patients.  The link between a 
healthy diet and healthy living is well established where lower food insecurity is linked to 
lower risk of obesity, heart disease, type 2 diabetes and certain cancers.  Healthy eating 
can help people with chronic diseases manage these conditions and avoid complications.  
The crisis in food security among the most vulnerable population has been reported and 
has come to light more recently in the Aloha United Way’s 2024 ALICE Report.  The 
Report indicated that 28% of households statewide face food insecurity; nearly half (46%) 
of households below the ALICE Threshold do not have consistent access to food.   
 
Only thirteen states tax most foods purchased for consumption at home from the state 
sales tax.  Six of the states that tax groceries do so at a reduced rate.  Taxing the sale of 
groceries is generally considered regressive and disproportionately hurts working families 
because they spend a higher percentage of their income on food.  Hawaii's general excise 
tax on groceries negatively affects not only the amount of food that Hawaii families can 
afford, but also the quality and diversity of their food choices.  Reducing the rate of the 
KAPl‘OLAN|
PAL|MQM|
HEALTH
\S}I|'T_'§<‘§>E§

 
2 
 
general excise tax on the sale of groceries eligible under the SNAP and WIC programs 
as well as nonprescription drugs will have an immediate positive effect on our cost of 
living by making these items more affordable. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 

 
  
Jan. 30, 2025, 9:35 a.m.  
Hawaii State Capitol 
Conference Room 325 and Videoconference 
 
To: House Committee on Human Services and Homelessness  
      Rep. Lisa Marten, Chair 
      Rep. Ikaika Olds, Vice Chair 
 
From: Grassroot Institute of Hawaii​
           Ted Kefalas, Director of Strategic Campaigns 
 
RE: HB933 — RELATING TO GENERAL EXCISE TAX REDUCTIONS 
 
Aloha Chair Marten, Vice-Chair Olds and other members of the Committee,  
 
The Grassroot Institute of Hawaii supports HB933, which would lower the general excise tax by one-half of a 
percent for groceries eligible for purchase under the federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance and Special 
Supplemental Nutrition programs for Women, Infants and Children programs and over-the-counter 
nonprescription medications.  
 
The bill would also direct the Hawaii Department of Business, Economic Development and Tourism to conduct 
a cost-benefit analysis of the lower rate prior to the 2027 legislative session.  
 
This is a good bill, one that would make an immediate difference when it comes to addressing Hawaii’s high 
cost of living. Research shows that taxes on groceries contribute to less spending on meals at home1 and 
higher food insecurity,2 so lowering the tax for eligible groceries and nonprescription medications under these 
two federal programs, SNAP and WIC,  would go a long way toward making Hawaii more affordable for these 
struggling Hawaii residents. 
 
2 Jianqiang Zhao, “Putting Grocery Food Taxes on the Table: Evidence for Food Security Policy-Makers,” Master’s Thesis, Cornell 
University, Aug. 2020, p. iii. 
1 Diansheng Dong and Hayden Stewart, “Food Taxes and Their Impacts on Food Spending,” U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic 
Research Service, Sept. 2021, p. 7.  
1050 Bishop St. #508 | Honolulu, HI 96813 | 808-864-1776 | info@grassrootinstitute.org 
1 
1050 Bishop st. #505
G
S S R U
Honolulu, HI 96813
soa-as-4-rws
info-@gras5r0otinstitute.0rg
% IGW"
VéI1k€ﬂlIQﬂ&&\%%I¢i'v”"
'%lL€&lﬂ
Removing harriers to Hawaii’s prosperity

 
In addition, the state’s 4% general excise tax is regressive, hitting low and middle-income individuals and 
families the hardest, so again, an exemption affecting many of these families would help them keep foot on 
their tables. 
 
This bill would also have broader benefits. The Georgia state auditor recently estimated that Georgia’s sales tax 
exemption for groceries created more than 5,000 jobs and an additional $807 million in economic output.3  
 
For anyone concerned that tourists might be the primary beneficiaries of changes to the GET, HB933 limits the 
proposed exemption to only SNAP- and WIC-eligible groceries. The bill would retain the excise tax on 
restaurants and thus a significant amount of visitor food spending.  
 
Regarding nonprescription medications and medical equipment and supplies, a GET exemption for these 
products would simply be in keeping with the logic behind the state’s existing exemption for prescription drugs 
and prosthetics.4 
 
If this bill is enacted, nonprescription medicines such as Tylenol and Advil would suddenly cost less, making it 
easier for many individuals suffering from everyday health conditions to find relief and save money. 
 
In 2022, the Hawaii Department of Taxation director estimated that exempting groceries from the general 
excise tax could save taxpayers $268 million.5 It is unclear how much this bill would save consumers, but it 
would nonetheless generate an appreciable amount of relief from Hawaii’s cost of living.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.  
 
Ted Kefalas  
Director of Strategic Campaigns  
Grassroot Institute of Hawaii  
5 Isaac Choy, “Column: GET not as regressive as some believe,” Honolulu Star-Advertiser, July 24, 2022.  
4 “Hawaii General Excise & Use Tax Exemptions: Tax Year 2021,” Hawaii Department of Taxation, Nov. 2022, p. 6.  
3 “Tax Incentive Evaluation: Grocery Sales Tax Exemption,” Georgia Department of Audits and Accounts, Dec. 13, 2022.  
1050 Bishop St. #508 | Honolulu, HI 96813 | 808-864-1776 | info@grassrootinstitute.org 
2 

 
1050 Bishop St.  PMB 235 | 
Honolulu, HI 96813  
P: 808-533-1292 | e: 
info@hawaiifood.com 
Executive Officers 
Maile Miyashiro, C&S Wholesale Grocer, Chair 
Kit Okimoto, Okimoto Corp., Vice Chair 
Jayson Watts, Mahi Pono, Secretary/Treasurer 
Lauren Zirbel, HFIA, Executive Director 
Paul Kosasa, ABC Stores, Advisor 
Derek Kurisu, KTA Superstores, Advisor 
Toby Taniguchi, KTA Superstores, Advisor 
Joe Carter, Coca-Cola Bottling of Hawaii, Advisor 
Eddie Asato, Pint Size Hawaii, Advisor 
Gary Okimoto, Safeway, Immediate Past Chair 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TO: Committee on Human Services and Homelessness 
FROM: HAWAII FOOD INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION 
 
Lauren Zirbel, Executive Director 
 
DATE: January 30. 2025 
TIME:   9:35am 
 
 
RE: HB933 Relating to General Excise Tax Reductions 
Position: Support  
 
The Hawaii Food Industry Association is comprised of two hundred member companies 
representing retailers, suppliers, producers, manufacturers and distributors of food and 
beverage related products in the State of Hawaii.   
My name is Lauren Zirbel, and I am testifying in strong support of HB 933, which 
seeks to eliminate the General Excise Tax (GET) on groceries and nonprescription 
drugs in Hawai‘i. 
Hawai‘i has one of the highest costs of living in the nation, placing immense financial 
strain on local families. The combination of inflation, supply chain disruptions, and 
the economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated food insecurity, 
leaving nearly 30% of households food insecure in 2023, according to the Hawai‘i 
Foodbank. On Hawai‘i Island, the situation is even more dire, with The Food Basket 
reporting a food insecurity rate of 40%. 
Under these circumstances, taxing food is both unethical and unnecessary. Grocery 
taxes disproportionately burden low- and middle-income families, exacerbating 
economic hardship and worsening food insecurity. Hawai‘i’s 4.5% GET adds an 
estimated $773 per year in additional costs for a family of four under the USDA’s 
Thrifty Food Plan. For many residents, this is the difference between putting food on the 
table and going hungry. 
HAWAII FOOD INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION

 
 
 
 
The Link Between Grocery Taxes and Food Insecurity 
Decades of research confirm that grocery taxes directly contribute to higher rates of 
food insecurity: 
• A 2021 study by Cornell University found that even small increases in grocery 
taxes significantly increase the likelihood of food insecurity among low-income 
households. 
• The Food Research & Action Center (FRAC) found that states with grocery 
taxes of 4% or more see a 3% increase in food insecurity. 
• The Food Research & Action Center (FRAC) found that states with grocery 
taxes of 4% or more see a 3% increase in food insecurity. 
•  
• According to a 2021 study published in Food Policy, states that impose 
grocery taxes rank among the most food insecure in the country. 
Furthermore, taxing essential food and medicine is a regressive policy that 
disproportionately affects kūpuna, low-income families, and individuals with disabilities. 
Families experiencing food insecurity skip meals, purchase less nutritious options, 
and reduce portion sizes, leading to negative long-term health outcomes. 
Economic Benefits of Eliminating the GET on Groceries 
The vast majority of U.S. states do not tax groceries because they recognize the 
harm it causes to families and the economy. In recent years, multiple states have taken 
action: 
• Kansas began phasing out its 6.5% food tax in 2023, reducing it to 4% in 2024, 
with a plan to eliminate it entirely by 2025. 
• Alabama and Virginia have also reduced or eliminated grocery taxes, 
implementing phased approaches to balance budgetary needs while providing 
immediate relief to residents. 
• Georgia’s phased elimination of grocery taxes in the 1990s resulted in 
$691.4 million in household savings, 18,577 new jobs, and $1.45 billion in 
economic output by 2021. 
These examples show that states can remove grocery taxes without jeopardizing 
their budgets, while simultaneously reducing food insecurity and boosting 
economic activity. 

 
 
 
 
Health and Social Consequences of Grocery Taxes 
Taxing groceries and essential medicines contributes to worse health outcomes, 
particularly among children and vulnerable populations: 
• Higher rates of obesity, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease as families rely 
on lower-cost, less nutritious foods. 
• Increased healthcare costs due to the long-term impacts of food insecurity. 
• Negative effects on childhood development, education, and mental health 
due to poor nutrition and chronic stress. 
A study published in Health Economics Review found that grocery taxes increase 
food insecurity, leading to worse health outcomes and higher healthcare costs. 
Reducing the GET on groceries would provide much-needed relief, allowing families to 
prioritize nutrition, healthcare, and other essential expenses. 
Conclusion 
Hawai‘i is already facing a severe food insecurity crisis, and continuing to tax groceries 
will only worsen the situation. Research consistently shows that grocery taxes harm 
low-income families, increase food insecurity, and contribute to economic 
inequality. Eliminating the GET on food and nonprescription drugs will: 
• Provide immediate financial relief to residents 
• Reduce food insecurity and improve health outcomes 
• Align Hawai‘i’s tax policy with the majority of U.S. states 
• Stimulate the local economy by increasing consumer spending 
I respectfully urge the Legislature to pass HB 933 and remove the GET on essential 
groceries and nonprescription drugs, ensuring that no Hawai‘i resident has to choose 
between paying taxes and feeding their family. 
Mahalo for the opportunity to testify. 
  
  
Additional Sources:  
https://business.cornell.edu/hub/2021/05/18/researchers-find-grocery-taxes-harm-low-
income-households/ 
https://www.audits.ga.gov/ReportSearch/download/28852 
https://wfpc.sanford.duke.edu/research/grocery-food-taxes-and-evidence-for-food-
security-policy-makers/ 

 
 
 
 
https://news.cornell.edu/stories/2021/05/study-grocery-taxes-increase-likelihood-food-
insecurity  
 https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/thriftyfoodplan 
 
 
 
 
 
 

L E G I S L A T I V E    T A X    B I L L    S E R V I C E 
TAX FOUNDATION OF HAWAII 
735 Bishop Street, Suite 417 
 
Honolulu, Hawaii 96813  Tel. 536-4587 
 
 
SUBJECT: GENERAL EXCISE, Reduction of Rate on  Groceries; Nonprescription Drugs 
BILL NUMBER: HB 933, SB 875 
INTRODUCED BY: HB by ILAGAN, SB by FUKUNAGA 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:  Reduces the general excise tax rate on the gross proceeds or 
income from the sale of groceries that are eligible under the supplemental nutrition assistance 
program (SNAP) or special supplemental nutrition program for women, infants, and children 
(WIC), regardless of the means of purchase and the program eligibility of the purchaser. Reduces 
the general excise tax rate on the gross proceeds or income from the sale of nonprescription 
drugs. Requires DBEDT to conduct an economic cost-benefit analysis on the GET reductions. 
Loan Fund established under the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, as amended. 
SYNOPSIS:   Adds two new sections to chapter 237, HRS.  The first new section reduces the 
general excise tax rate by one-half percent, on gross proceeds or income received from the sale 
of all groceries eligible for purchase under the  Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program and 
Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children within the State 
(herein, both referred to as “Program”, regardless of the means of purchase and eligibility of the 
purchaser for Program benefits.   
“Groceries” is defined as any food or food product for home consumption and may be further 
defined by the department by rule or tax information release after consultation with USDA.   
Defines “food ” or “food product” as substances, whether in liquid, concentrated, solid, frozen, 
dried, or dehydrated form, that are sold for ingestion or chewing by humans and are consumed 
for their taste or nutritional value. 
The second new section to chapter 237, HRS, will on January 1, 2026, reduce the general excise 
tax rate by one-half per cent on gross proceeds or income received from the sale of 
nonprescription drugs. 
“Nonprescription drug” is defined as any packaged, bottled, or nonbulk chemical, drug, or 
medicine that may be lawfully sold without a practitioner’s order.    
Defines “drug” as: 
(1)   
Articles recognized in the official United States Pharmacopoeia, official United 
States Pharmacopoeia Dispensing Information, official Homeopathic Pharmacopoeia of the 
United States, or official National Formulary, or any supplement to any of these publications; 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 
 	

Re:  HB 933, SB 875 
Page 2 
(2)   
Articles intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or 
prevention of disease in humans; 
(3)   
Articles, other than food or clothing, intended to affect the structure or any 
function of the body of humans; or 
(4)   
Articles intended for use as a component of any article specified in paragraph (1), 
(2), or (3); provided that the term "drug" does not include devices or their components, parts or 
accessories, cosmetics, or liquor as defined in section 281-1. 
Section 3 of the bill requires the Department of Business, Economic Development and Tourism 
to conduct an economic cost-benefit analysis on the bill’s general excise tax reductions for 
calendar 2026 which is to be submitted prior to the convening of the 2027 regular session. 
EFFECTIVE DATE: July 1, 2025.  
STAFF COMMENTS:   Food stamps and related payments such as under the Special 
Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (known as WIC) are now 
exempt from general excise tax under HRS section 237-24.3(5) and the Department of Taxation 
has interpreted this exemption as covering payments under the SNAP program as well. 
Similarly, the GET law has since 1986 exempted the sale of prescription drugs and prosthetic 
devices.  Act 47, SLH 2024, exempted healthcare related goods or services purchased under 
Medicare, Medicaid, or TRICARE. 
This bill is intended to address the high cost of living in Hawaii by proposing reductions in the 
general excise tax rate, rather than exemptions, on products consumed in Hawaii on a daily basis.   
The GET rate reduction for all groceries eligible for WIC and SNAP, even if not purchased with 
a SNAP card, presumably targets healthy food for consumption, even if the buyer is above the 
income requirements for SNAP.  And the rate reduction for nonprescription drugs presumably is 
done to promote health care. 
 
Digested:  1/28/2025 
