JOSH GREEN M.D. 
GOVERNOR 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
LT. GOVERNOR 
STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
DEPARTMENT OF TAXATION 
Ka ‘Oihana ‘Auhau 
P.O. BOX 259 
HONOLULU, HAWAI‘I 96809 
PHONE NO: (808) 587-1540 
FAX NO: (808) 587-1560 
GARY S. SUGANUMA 
DIRECTOR  
 
KRISTEN M.R. SAKAMOTO 
DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF 
GARY S. SUGANUMA, DIRECTOR OF TAXATION 
 
 
TESTIMONY ON THE FOLLOWING MEASURE: 
H.B. No. 933, H.D. 1, Relating to General Excise Tax Reductions. 
 
BEFORE THE: 
House Committee on Economic Development & Technology 
 
 
DATE: 
 
Friday, February 7, 2025 
TIME:  
 
10:15 a.m. 
LOCATION:  
State Capitol, Room 423 
 
 
Chair Ilagan, Vice-Chair Hussey, and Members of the Committee: 
 
The Department of Taxation (DOTAX) offers the following comments regarding 
H.B. 933, H.D. 1, for your consideration. 
 
Section 2 of H.B. 933, H.D. 1, adds two new sections to chapter 237, Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS). The first proposed section beginning on page 3 imposes a 
reduced general excise tax (GET) rate on the proceeds received from the sale of 
groceries eligible for purchase under the supplemental nutrition assistance program 
(SNAP) and special supplemental nutrition program for women, infants, and children 
(WIC) within the State, regardless of the means of purchase and the eligibility of the 
purchaser for the SNAP and WIC programs. The reduced rate is one-half percent less 
than the rate applied under section 237-13, HRS (4%). 
 
The bill requires DOTAX to consult with the federal Food and Nutrition Service of 
the United States Department of Agriculture to determine if further definition of the term 
“groceries” is needed.  
 
The next proposed section beginning on page 4 imposes a reduced GET rate on 
the gross proceeds or income received from the sale of nonprescription drugs. The 
reduced rate is one-half percent less than the rate applied under section 237-13, HRS 
(4%). 

Department of Taxation Testimony 
H.B. 933, H.D. 1 
February 7, 2025 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
 
Section 3 of the bill requires the Department of Business, Economic 
Development, and Tourism (DBEDT) to conduct an economic cost-benefit analysis on 
the general excise tax reductions in section 2 of the bill. 
 
The measure has a defective effective date of July 1, 3000. 
 
DOTAX notes that the measure may complicate reporting for taxpayers and 
businesses, who will likely need to track and report receipts of sales subject to the 
proposed reduced rates separately from sales subject to the normal 4% rate. 
 
If passed, DOTAX requests the measure take effect on January 1, 2027 to allow 
for form and instruction changes necessary to implement the proposed reduced rates 
for sales of eligible groceries and nonprescription drugs. This would also allow 
taxpayers, particularly businesses, to update their accounting systems to comply with 
the changes in this measure. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments on this measure.  
 

 
 
 JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
LT. GOVERNOR 
 
JAMES KUNANE TOKIOKA 
  DIRECTOR 
        
                      DANE K. WICKER 
                                DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF BUSINESS, 
 
 
 
 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT & TOURISM 
 
 
 
    KA ʻOIHANA HOʻOMOHALA PĀʻOIHANA, ʻIMI WAIWAI   
 
 
 
     A HOʻOMĀKAʻIKAʻI 
  
 
 
 
 
No. 1 Capitol District Building, 250 South Hotel Street, 5th Floor, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813 
 
Telephone:  
(808) 586-2355 
 
 
 
 
Mailing Address:  P.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96804 
 
 
 
 
Fax: 
(808) 586-2377 
 
 
 
 
Web site:  dbedt.hawaii.gov 
 
 
Statement of 
JAMES KUNANE TOKIOKA 
Director 
Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism 
before the 
House Committee on Economic Development & Technology 
 
Thursday, February 7, 2025 
10:15 AM 
State Capitol, Conference Room 423 
 
In consideration of  
HB933, HD1 
RELATING TO GENERAL EXCISE TAX REDUCTIONS. 
 
Chair Ilagan, Vice Chair Hussey and members of the Committee. 
 
The Department of Business, Economic Development and Tourism (DBEDT) supports 
the intent and offers comments on HB933, HD1, which requires DBEDT to conduct an 
economic cost-benefit analysis on the general excise tax (GET) reductions related to the bill. 
 
According to Data from Hawaii State Department of Human Services, a total of 156,967 
individuals in Hawaii were served by the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) in 
FY 2023. DBEDT notes that eligible groceries purchased by eligible participants under the 
supplemental nutrition assistance program and special supplemental nutrition program for 
women, infants, and children within the state are exempt from Hawaii’s General Excise Tax 
under H.R.S. §237-24.3(5).  
 
The core of the cost-benefit analysis is the estimate on the change in the general excise tax 
revenues. In forecasting the state tax revenue, the Department of Taxation (DoTax) and State 
Council on Revenues (COR) would estimate the impact of this bill and would incorporate their 
estimates into the forecasting models once the bill passes and became law. 

DBEDT can do the study; however, DoTax and COR will have done the estimates anyway 
and we will need the DoTax to provide us with the related data. Thank you for the opportunity to 
testify. 
 
. 

 
 
 
    
 
 
 
Hawai‘i Pacific Health  |  55 Merchant Street  |  Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96813 
Friday, February 7, 2025 at 10:15 AM  
Via Video Conference; Conference Room 423 
 
House Committee on Economic Development 
 
To:  
Representative Greggor Ilagan, Chair 
        Representative Ikaika Hussey, Vice Chair 
 
From: Michael Robinson 
 
Vice President, Government Relations & Community Affairs 
 
Re:     Testimony in Support of HB 933, HD1 
Relating To General Excise Tax Reductions  
 
 
My name is Michael Robinson, and I am the Vice President of Government Relations & 
Community Affairs at Hawai‘i Pacific Health. Hawai‘i Pacific Health is a not-for-profit 
health care system comprised of its four medical centers – Kapi‘olani, Pali Momi, Straub 
and Wilcox and over 70 locations statewide with a mission of creating a healthier Hawai‘i. 
 
HPH writes in SUPPORT of HB 933, HD1 which reduces the general excise tax rate on 
the gross proceeds or income from the sale of groceries that are eligible under the 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) or Special Supplemental Nutrition 
Program for women, infants, and children (WIC).  The measure also reduces the general 
excise tax rate on the gross proceeds or income from the sale of nonprescription drugs.  
 
HPH has long recognized the relationship between healthy outcomes and food security, 
as well as the strong connection between access to healthy foods with health and 
wellness.  HPH screens our in-patients across our facilities for indications of food 
insecurity and is acutely aware of the challenge it is for our patients.  The link between a 
healthy diet and healthy living is well established where lower food insecurity is linked to 
lower risk of obesity, heart disease, type 2 diabetes and certain cancers.  Healthy eating 
can help people with chronic diseases manage these conditions and avoid complications.  
The crisis in food security among the most vulnerable population has been reported and 
has come to light more recently in the Aloha United Way’s 2024 ALICE Report.  The 
Report indicated that 28% of households statewide face food insecurity; nearly half (46%) 
of households below the ALICE Threshold do not have consistent access to food.   
 
Only thirteen states tax most foods purchased for consumption at home from the state 
sales tax.  Six of the states that tax groceries do so at a reduced rate.  Taxing the sale of 
groceries is generally considered regressive and disproportionately hurts working families 
because they spend a higher percentage of their income on food.  Hawaii's general excise 
tax on groceries negatively affects not only the amount of food that Hawaii families can 

 
Page 2 
afford, but also the quality and diversity of their food choices.  Reducing the rate of the 
general excise tax on the sale of groceries eligible under the SNAP and WIC programs 
as well as nonprescription drugs will have an immediate positive effect on our cost of 
living by making these items more affordable. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
 

 
 
   
 
 
 
Date: February 7, 2025  
 
Subject: Hawaiʻi Foodbank in Support of HB 933 Relating to General Excise Tax Reduction 
 
Aloha Chair Ilagan, Vice Chair Hussey, and members of the committee,  
 
On behalf of Hawaiʻi Foodbank, I express our support for HB 933, Relating General Excise Tax 
Reduction. This bill reduces the general excise tax rate on the gross proceeds or income from the sale 
of groceries that are eligible under the supplemental nutrition assistance program (SNAP) or special 
supplemental nutrition program for women, infants, and children (WIC), regardless of the means of 
purchase and the program eligibility of the purchaser. In addition, it reduces the general excise tax 
rate on the gross proceeds or income from the sale of nonprescription drugs, and requires DBEDT to 
conduct an economic cost-beneﬁt analysis on the GET reductions. 
 
As the state’s largest hunger-relief organization, Hawai‘i Foodbank has been committed to ensuring 
no one in Hawai‘i goes hungry since 1983. We work with over 225 agency partners on Oʻahu and Kauaʻi 
to distribute food, and programs like Food 4 Keiki and ‘Ohana Produce Plus provide nutritious meals 
to children and families. Last  year, Hawai‘i Foodbank provided food for 17.7 million meals and served 
an average of more than 150,000 people each month. In addition to addressing daily needs, our 
organization mobilizes during emergencies to provide immediate relief and aid long-term recovery 
efforts.  
 
Food insecurity is a growing crisis in Hawai‘i, with nearly 1 in 3 households struggling to access 
adequate food. One in ten households go a whole day without food some or most months. The recent 
2024 ALICE in Hawai‘i report, released by Aloha United Way, underscores the broader economic 
challenges fueling food insecurity. 40% of Hawai‘i’s families are at the ALICE  (asset-limited, income-
constrained, employed) threshold or below. These households live paycheck to paycheck, and nearly 
half of those below the ALICE threshold face food insecurity. Taxing the sale of groceries 
disproportionately impacts these families, affecting not only the amount of food that Hawai‘i families 
can afford, but also the quality and diversity of their food choices.  
 
Reducing the amount of money families must spend to purchase healthy, adequate food is a critical 
step in the ﬁght against hunger and we urge you to consider this important measure.   
 
With aloha,   
  
Amy Miller   
President and CEO, Hawai‘i Foodbank   

L E G I S L A T I V E    T A X    B I L L    S E R V I C E 
TAX FOUNDATION OF HAWAII 
735 Bishop Street, Suite 417 
 
Honolulu, Hawaii 96813  Tel. 536-4587 
 
 
SUBJECT: GENERAL EXCISE, Reduction of Rate on Groceries and Nonprescription Drugs 
BILL NUMBER: HB 933 HD 1 
INTRODUCED BY: House Committee on Human Services & Homelessness 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:  Reduces the general excise tax rate on the gross proceeds or 
income from the sale of groceries that are eligible under the supplemental nutrition assistance 
program (SNAP) or special supplemental nutrition program for women, infants, and children 
(WIC), regardless of the means of purchase and the program eligibility of the purchaser. Reduces 
the general excise tax rate on the gross proceeds or income from the sale of nonprescription 
drugs. Requires DBEDT to conduct an economic cost-benefit analysis on the GET reductions. 
Loan Fund established under the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, as amended. 
SYNOPSIS:   Adds two new sections to chapter 237, HRS.  The first new section reduces the 
general excise tax rate by one-half percent, on gross proceeds or income received from the sale 
of all groceries eligible for purchase under the  Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program and 
Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children within the State 
(herein, both referred to as “Program”, regardless of the means of purchase and eligibility of the 
purchaser for Program benefits.   
“Groceries” is defined as any food or food product for home consumption and may be further 
defined by the department by rule or tax information release after consultation with USDA.   
Defines “food ” or “food product” as substances, whether in liquid, concentrated, solid, frozen, 
dried, or dehydrated form, that are sold for ingestion or chewing by humans and are consumed 
for their taste or nutritional value. 
The second new section to chapter 237, HRS, will on January 1, 2026, reduce the general excise 
tax rate by one-half per cent on gross proceeds or income received from the sale of 
nonprescription drugs. 
“Nonprescription drug” is defined as any packaged, bottled, or nonbulk chemical, drug, or 
medicine that may be lawfully sold without a practitioner’s order.    
Defines “drug” as: 
(1)   
Articles recognized in the official United States Pharmacopoeia, official United 
States Pharmacopoeia Dispensing Information, official Homeopathic Pharmacopoeia of the 
United States, or official National Formulary, or any supplement to any of these publications; 

Re:  HB 933  HD 1 
Page 2 
(2)   
Articles intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or 
prevention of disease in humans; 
(3)   
Articles, other than food or clothing, intended to affect the structure or any 
function of the body of humans; or 
(4)   
Articles intended for use as a component of any article specified in paragraph (1), 
(2), or (3); provided that the term "drug" does not include devices or their components, parts or 
accessories, cosmetics, or liquor as defined in section 281-1. 
Section 3 of the bill requires the Department of Business, Economic Development and Tourism 
to conduct an economic cost-benefit analysis on the bill’s general excise tax reductions for 
calendar 2026 which is to be submitted prior to the convening of the 2027 regular session. 
EFFECTIVE DATE: July 1, 3000.  
STAFF COMMENTS:   Food stamps and related payments such as under the Special 
Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (known as WIC) are now 
exempt from general excise tax under HRS section 237-24.3(5) and the Department of Taxation 
has interpreted this exemption as covering payments under the SNAP program as well. 
Similarly, the GET law has since 1986 exempted the sale of prescription drugs and prosthetic 
devices.  Act 47, SLH 2024, exempted healthcare related goods or services purchased under 
Medicare, Medicaid, or TRICARE. 
This bill is intended to address the high cost of living in Hawaii by proposing reductions in the 
general excise tax rate, rather than exemptions, on products consumed in Hawaii on a daily basis.   
The GET rate reduction for all groceries eligible for WIC and SNAP, even if not purchased with 
a SNAP card, presumably targets healthy food for consumption, even if the buyer is above the 
income requirements for SNAP.  And the rate reduction for nonprescription drugs presumably is 
done to promote health care. 
Digested: 2/5/2025 

 
  
Feb. 7, 2025, 10:15 a.m.  
Hawaii State Capitol 
Conference Room 423 and Videoconference 
 
To: House Committee on Economic Development and Technology 
      Rep. Greggor Ilagan, Chair 
      Rep. Ikaika Hussey, Vice Chair 
 
From: Grassroot Institute of Hawaii​
           Ted Kefalas, Director of Strategic Campaigns 
 
RE: HB933 HD1 — RELATING TO GENERAL EXCISE TAX REDUCTIONS 
 
Aloha Chair Ilagan, Vice-Chair Hussey and other members of the Committee,  
 
The Grassroot Institute of Hawaii supports HB933 HD1, which would lower the general excise tax by a 
half-percent for groceries eligible for purchase under the federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance and 
Special Supplemental Nutrition programs for Women, Infants and Children programs and over-the-counter 
nonprescription medications.  
 
The bill would also direct the Hawaii Department of Business, Economic Development and Tourism to conduct 
a cost-benefit analysis of the lower rate prior to the 2027 legislative session.  
 
This is a good bill, one that would make an immediate difference when it comes to addressing Hawaii’s high 
cost of living.  
 
Research shows that taxes on groceries contribute to less spending on meals at home1 and higher food 
insecurity,2 so lowering the tax for eligible groceries and nonprescription medications under these two federal 
programs, SNAP and WIC,  would go a long way toward making Hawaii more affordable for these struggling 
Hawaii residents. 
2 Jianqiang Zhao, “Putting Grocery Food Taxes on the Table: Evidence for Food Security Policy-Makers,” Master’s Thesis, Cornell 
University, Aug. 2020, p. iii. 
1 Diansheng Dong and Hayden Stewart, “Food Taxes and Their Impacts on Food Spending,” U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic 
Research Service, Sept. 2021, p. 7.  
1050 Bishop St. #508 | Honolulu, HI 96813 | 808-864-1776 | info@grassrootinstitute.org 
1 

 
 
In addition, the state’s 4% general excise tax is regressive, hitting low and middle-income individuals and 
families the hardest, so again, an exemption affecting many of these families would help them keep food on 
their tables. 
 
This bill would also have broader benefits. The Georgia state auditor recently estimated that Georgia’s sales tax 
exemption for groceries created more than 5,000 jobs and an additional $807 million in economic output.3  
 
For anyone concerned that tourists might be the primary beneficiaries of changes to the GET, HB933 limits the 
proposed exemption to only SNAP- and WIC-eligible groceries. The bill would retain the excise tax on 
restaurants and thus a significant amount of visitor food spending.  
 
Regarding nonprescription medications and medical equipment and supplies, a GET exemption for these 
products would simply be in keeping with the logic behind the state’s existing exemption for prescription drugs 
and prosthetics.4 
 
If this bill is enacted, nonprescription medicines such as Tylenol and Advil would suddenly cost less, making it 
easier for many individuals suffering from everyday health conditions to find relief and save money. 
 
In 2022, the Hawaii Department of Taxation director estimated that exempting groceries from the general 
excise tax could save taxpayers $268 million.5 It is unclear how much this bill would save consumers, but it 
would nonetheless generate an appreciable amount of relief from Hawaii’s cost of living.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.  
 
Ted Kefalas  
Director of Strategic Campaigns  
Grassroot Institute of Hawaii  
5 Isaac Choy, “Column: GET not as regressive as some believe,” Honolulu Star-Advertiser, July 24, 2022.  
4 “Hawaii General Excise & Use Tax Exemptions: Tax Year 2021,” Hawaii Department of Taxation, Nov. 2022, p. 6.  
3 “Tax Incentive Evaluation: Grocery Sales Tax Exemption,” Georgia Department of Audits and Accounts, Dec. 13, 2022.  
1050 Bishop St. #508 | Honolulu, HI 96813 | 808-864-1776 | info@grassrootinstitute.org 
2 

 
 
 
To advance and promote a healthy economic environment 
for business, advocating for a responsive government and 
quality education, while preserving Maui’s unique community 
characteristics. 
 
HEARING BEFORE THE HOUSE COMMITTEE ON 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT & TECHNOLOGY 
HAWAII STATE CAPITOL, HOUSE CONFERENCE ROOM 423 
Friday, February 7, 2025 AT 10:15 A.M. 
  
To The Honorable Greggor Ilagan, Chair 
The Honorable Ikaika Hussey, Vice Chair 
Members of the Committee on Economic Development and Technology 
 
SUPPORT HB933 RELATING TO GENERAL EXCISE TAX REDUCTIONS 
  
The Maui Chamber of Commerce SUPPORTS HB933 which reduces the general excise tax rate on the 
gross proceeds or income from the sale of groceries that are eligible under the supplemental nutrition 
assistance program (SNAP) or special supplemental nutrition program for women, infants, and children 
(WIC), regardless of the means of purchase and the program eligibility of the purchaser; and reduces 
the general excise tax rate on the gross proceeds or income from the sale of nonprescription drugs. 
 
The Maui Chamber recognizes that many factors increase our high cost of living, including food, 
transportation, and more, all of which are impacted by the GET. We have long supported exempting 
groceries from the GET as a way to reduce the cost of living as this tax is passed on to residents. 
 
For these reasons, the Maui Chamber of Commerce fully supports HB933 and respectfully urges its 
passage. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Pamela Tumpap 
President 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

 
1050 Bishop St.  PMB 235 | 
Honolulu, HI 96813  
P: 808-533-1292 | e: 
info@hawaiifood.com 
Executive Officers 
Maile Miyashiro, C&S Wholesale Grocer, Chair 
Kit Okimoto, Okimoto Corp., Vice Chair 
Jayson Watts, Mahi Pono, Secretary/Treasurer 
Lauren Zirbel, HFIA, Executive Director 
Paul Kosasa, ABC Stores, Advisor 
Derek Kurisu, KTA Superstores, Advisor 
Toby Taniguchi, KTA Superstores, Advisor 
Joe Carter, Coca-Cola Bottling of Hawaii, Advisor 
Eddie Asato, Pint Size Hawaii, Advisor 
Gary Okimoto, Safeway, Immediate Past Chair 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TO: Committe on Economic Development and Tourism 
FROM: HAWAII FOOD INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION 
 
Lauren Zirbel, Executive Director 
 
DATE: February 7. 2025 
TIME: 10:15am   
 
 
RE: HB933 HD1 Relating to General Excise Tax Reductions 
Position: Support 
Hawai‘i has one of the highest costs of living in the nation, placing immense financial 
strain on local families. The combination of inflation, supply chain disruptions, and the 
economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated food insecurity, leaving 
nearly 30% of households food insecure in 2023, according to the Hawai‘i Foodbank. 
On Hawai‘i Island, the situation is even more dire, with The Food Basket reporting a 
food insecurity rate of 40%. 
Under these circumstances, taxing food is both unethical and unnecessary. Grocery 
taxes disproportionately burden low- and middle-income families, exacerbating economic 
hardship and worsening food insecurity. Hawai‘i’s 4.5% GET adds an estimated $773 
per year in additional costs for a family of four under the USDA’s Thrifty Food Plan. For 
many residents, this is the difference between putting food on the table and going hungry. 
The Link Between Grocery Taxes and Food Insecurity 
Decades of research confirm that grocery taxes directly contribute to significantly 
higher rates of food insecurity: “We found that even the slightest increase in tax rate 
correlated to an increased likelihood of food insecurity. Grocery taxes that rose by just 
one percentage point led to a higher risk of hunger in households” (Kaiser). 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

 
 
 
 
• Zheng, Y., Zhao, J., Buck, S., Burney, S., & Kaiser, H. M. (2021). Putting grocery 
food taxes on the table: Evidence for food security policy-makers. Food Policy. 
ScienceDirect 
• World Food Policy Center. (2021). Why grocery taxes hurt low-income families: 
More evidence for policymakers. Duke University, Sanford School of Public Policy. 
Listen here 
• Health Economics Review. (n.d.). The effect of grocery taxes on health outcomes: 
Insights from low-income communities. BioMed Central. Read the article 
• Center for Budget and Policy Priorities: States That Still Impose Sales Taxes on 
Groceries Should Consider Reducing or Eliminating Them: 
https://www.cbpp.org/research/state-budget-and-tax/which-states-tax-the-sale-
of-food-for-home-consumption-in-2017 
 https://www.cbpp.org/sites/default/files/atoms/files/3-16-06sfp3.pdf 
 
Furthermore, taxing essential food and medicine is a regressive policy that 
disproportionately affects kūpuna, low-income families, and individuals with disabilities. 
Families experiencing food insecurity skip meals, purchase less nutritious options, 
and reduce portion sizes, leading to negative long-term health outcomes. 
Economic Benefits of Eliminating the GET on Groceries 
The vast majority of U.S. states do not tax groceries because they recognize the harm 
it causes to families and the economy. In recent years, multiple states have taken action: 
• Kansas will join the growing group of 38 states that don't tax food on Jan. 1, 2025. 
The state sales tax has been decreasing little by little each year in phases thanks 
to a plan by Gov. Laura Kelly. In 2022, it was at 6.5%. In 2023, it was down to 4% 
and in 2024, it dropped to just 2%. Now, in 2025, there will be no state sales tax. 
https://www.kmbc.com/article/kansas-sales-tax-groceries-drops-to-zero-starting-
2025/63294687 
• Alabama and Virginia have also reduced or eliminated grocery taxes, 
implementing phased approaches to balance budgetary needs while providing 
immediate relief to residents. 
 https://vadogwood.com/2023/08/28/credit-where-credits-due-who-cut-
virginias-grocery-tax/ 
• Georgia’s phased elimination of grocery taxes in the 1990s resulted in $691.4 
million in household savings, 18,577 new jobs, and $1.45 billion in economic 
output by 2021. 

 
 
 
 
 Georgia State Audit Reports. Download report 
These examples show that states can remove grocery taxes without jeopardizing their 
budgets, while simultaneously reducing food insecurity and boosting economic 
activity. 
Health and Social Consequences of Grocery Taxes 
Taxing groceries and essential medicines contributes to worse health outcomes, 
particularly among children and vulnerable populations: 
• Higher rates of obesity, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease as families rely 
on lower-cost, less nutritious foods. 
• Increased healthcare costs due to the long-term impacts of food insecurity. 
• Negative effects on childhood development, education, and mental health 
due to poor nutrition and chronic stress. 
A study published in Health Economics Review found that grocery taxes increase 
food insecurity, leading to worse health outcomes and higher healthcare costs. 
Reducing the GET on groceries would provide much-needed relief, allowing families to 
prioritize nutrition, healthcare, and other essential expenses. 
Conclusion 
Hawai‘i is already facing a severe food insecurity crisis, and continuing to tax groceries 
will only worsen the situation. Research consistently shows that grocery taxes harm 
low-income families, increase food insecurity, and contribute to economic 
inequality. Eliminating the GET on food and nonprescription drugs will: 
• Provide immediate financial relief to residents 
• Reduce food insecurity and improve health outcomes 
• Align Hawai‘i’s tax policy with the majority of U.S. states 
• Stimulate the local economy by increasing consumer spending 
 
HFIA respectfully encorages the Legislature to pass HB933 HD1 and reduce the GET 
on essential groceries and nonprescription drugs, ensuring that no Hawai‘i resident has 
to choose between paying taxes and feeding their family. 
Mahalo for the opportunity to testify. 

 
 
 
 
  
  
Additional Sources:  
https://business.cornell.edu/hub/2021/05/18/researchers-find-grocery-taxes-harm-low-
income-households/ 
https://www.audits.ga.gov/ReportSearch/download/28852 
https://wfpc.sanford.duke.edu/research/grocery-food-taxes-and-evidence-for-food-
security-policy-makers/ 
https://news.cornell.edu/stories/2021/05/study-grocery-taxes-increase-likelihood-food-
insecurity  
 https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/thriftyfoodplan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
733 Bishop Street, Suite 1200, Honolulu, HI 96813  |  (808) 545-4300  |  info@cochawaii.org  |  www.cochawaii.org 
 
Testimony to the House Committee on Economic Development & Technology (ECD) 
Representative Greggor Ilagan, Chair 
Representative Ikaika Hussey, Vice Chair 
 
Friday, February 7, 2025, at 10:15AM 
Conference Room 423 & Videoconference 
RE: HB933 HD1 Relating to General Excise Tax Reductions 
Aloha e Chair Ilagan, Vice Chair Hussey, and Members of the Committee:  
My name is Sherry Menor, President and CEO of the Chamber of Commerce Hawaii ("The Chamber"). 
The Chamber supports House Bill 933 HD1 (HB933 HD1), which establishes a public policy framework 
that addresses state goals related to economic diversification and appropriates funds to the Hawaii 
Technology and Development Corporation to implement specific programs that address these goals.  
 
HB933 HD1 aligns with our 2030 Blueprint for Hawaii: An Economic Action Plan, specifically under the 
policy pillar for Business Services. This bill promotes policies that drive economic growth, enhance 
workforce opportunities, and improve the quality of life for Hawaii's residents.  
 
Hawaii’s high cost of living makes food and medicine increasingly unaffordable. A 2021 University of 
Hawaii study found 48% of families with children face food insecurity, while a Cornell University 
study linked higher taxes to increased food insecurity. Hawaii is one of 13 states that tax groceries, 
disproportionately affecting low-income families. A USDA Thrifty Food Plan household spends $1,794.60 
monthly on food, paying over $800 annually in state taxes, with credits covering only a fraction. Cutting 
the general excise tax (GET) on groceries and nonprescription drugs would provide immediate relief and 
improve affordability. 
 
This bill reduces the GET rate on groceries and nonprescription drugs and mandates a cost-benefit 
analysis by the Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism (DBEDT). By lowering 
essential costs, it supports working families, seniors, and vulnerable populations while promoting food 
security. The Chamber supports this bill as a vital step in reducing Hawaii’s cost of living. 
 
The Chamber of Commerce Hawaii is the state’s leading business advocacy organization, dedicated to 
improving Hawaii’s economy and securing Hawaii’s future for growth and opportunity. Our mission is to 
foster a vibrant economic climate. As such, we support initiatives and policies that align with the 2030 
Blueprint for Hawaii that create opportunities to strengthen overall competitiveness, improve the 
quantity and skills of available workforce, diversify the economy, and build greater local wealth.  
 
We respectfully ask to pass House Bill 933 HD1. Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 
