 
 
 
 
JOSH GREEN M.D. 
GOVERNOR 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
LT. GOVERNOR 
STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
DEPARTMENT OF TAXATION 
Ka ‘Oihana ‘Auhau 
P.O. BOX 259 
HONOLULU, HAWAI‘I 96809 
PHONE NO: (808) 587-1540 
FAX NO: (808) 587-1560 
GARY S. SUGANUMA 
DIRECTOR  
 
KRISTEN M.R. SAKAMOTO 
DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF 
GARY S. SUGANUMA, DIRECTOR OF TAXATION 
 
 
TESTIMONY ON THE FOLLOWING MEASURE: 
H.B. No. 740, Relating to Housing. 
 
BEFORE THE: 
House Committee on Housing 
 
 
DATE: 
 
Wednesday, January 29, 2025 
TIME:  
 
9:15 a.m. 
LOCATION:  
State Capitol, Room 430 
 
 
Chair Evslin, Vice-Chair Miyake, and Members of the Committee: 
 
The Department of Taxation (DOTAX) offers the following comments regarding 
H.B. 740 for your consideration. 
 
Section 6 of H.B. 740 amends section 247-3, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS), to 
exempt from conveyance tax any property with a county owned deed restriction 
according to the new provisions under chapter 201H, HRS, in this bill.  
 
The measure shall take effect on July 1, 2025. 
 
DOTAX requests section 6 take effect on January 1, 2026 to allow for form and 
instruction changes necessary to implement the proposed conveyance tax exemption. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments on this measure.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
LT. GOVERNOR 
 
 
 
 
 
DEAN MINAKAMI 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAII 
DEPARTMENT OF BUSINESS, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND TOURISM  
HAWAII HOUSING FINANCE AND DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 
677 QUEEN STREET, SUITE 300 
HONOLULU, HAWAII 96813 
FAX: (808) 587-0600 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Statement of 
DEAN MINAKAMI 
Hawaii Housing Finance and Development Corporation 
Before the 
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON HOUSING 
January 29, 2025 at 9:15 a.m. 
State Capitol, Room 430 
In consideration of 
H.B. 740 
RELATING TO HOUSING 
Chair Evslin, Vice Chair Miyake, and members of the Committee.   
HHFDC supports HB 740, which establishes the Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) 
Financing and Deed Restriction Program under the Hawaii Housing Finance and 
Development Corporation (HHFDC) to allocate funds to the counties to provide grants 
to eligible homeowners or homebuyers to finance construction costs, development 
costs, and non-reoccurring closing costs associated with the construction of an ADU 
and purchase deed restrictions on such property. 
The upfront costs of designing and permitting an ADU are a barrier for many 
homeowners. HHFDC supports the ADU Financing and Deed Restriction program as a 
way to increase the inventory of rental units in the State.  
HHFDC has a few considerations: 
We suggest the inclusion of properties held in a revocable living trust in the definition of 
“Eligible homeowner or homebuyer.”  
The amount to be paid to the property owner for the deed restriction needs to be 
determined. Would it be a fixed amount for all properties, percentage of tax assessed 
value, or would it be based on an appraisal or other means? This could be addressed in 
administrative rules, but it would be helpful to know the legislative intent. 

 
 
 
 
The requirement that the deed restriction be in first position (page 5, line 6) may not be 
possible in planned communities where Conditions, Covenants, and Restrictions 
typically have first position. 
We request that clarification on section 201H-C, “Deed restriction; requirements” be 
provided as to whether the deed restriction applies to the primary residence, ADU, or 
both. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this bill. 

Council Chair 
Director of Council Services 
  Alice L. Lee 
David M. Raatz, Jr., Esq. 
 
Vice-Chair 
Deputy Director of Council Services 
  Yuki Lei K. Sugimura 
Richelle K. Kawasaki, Esq. 
 
Presiding Officer Pro Tempore 
  Tasha Kama 
 
Councilmembers 
  Tom Cook 
  Gabe Johnson 
  Tamara Paltin 
  Keani N.W. Rawlins-Fernandez 
  Shane M. Sinenci 
  Nohelani U‘u-Hodgins 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY COUNCIL 
COUNTY OF MAUI 
200 S. HIGH STREET 
WAILUKU, MAUI, HAWAII  96793 
www.MauiCounty.us 
 
January 29, 2025 
TO: 
The Honorable Luke A. Evslin, Chair, and 
 
Honorable Members of the House Committee on Housing 
FROM: 
Alice L. Lee 
 
Council Chair 
SUBJECT: HEARING OF JANUARY 29, 2025; TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF HB 740, 
RELATING TO HOUSING 
 
I support this measure to establish an Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) Financing and 
Deed Restriction Program under the Hawaiʻi Housing Finance and Development 
Corporation. 
I am providing this testimony in my capacity as an individual member of the Maui 
County Council.  
I support this measure for the following reasons: 
1. 
By incentivizing the construction of ADUs, this bill increases the number 
of available housing units, particularly in residential areas where space 
allows for additional dwellings. 
2. 
The bill places the responsibility on counties to apply for and allocate grant 
funding to eligible homeowners and homebuyers, allowing for localized 
decision making that aligns with specific community needs. 
3. 
The deed-restriction component of this bill safeguards housing for local 
residents by ensuring that ADUs remain accessible to those who live and 
work in Hawaiʻi. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
 
ocs:proj:legis:25legis:25testimony:hb740_paf25-007(4)_kjh 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

 
 
 
 
Testimony of the Hawai‘i Appleseed Center for Law and Economic Justice 
Support for HB 740 – Relating to Housing 
House Committee on Housing 
Wednesday, January 30, 2025 at 9:15AM Conf. Rm. 430  and via Videoconference 
 
 
Aloha Chair Evslin, Vice Chair Miyake, and Members of the Committee: 
Mahalo for the opportunity to testify in strong support of HB740, which would establish an 
Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) Financing and Deed Restriction Program. 
This innovative legislation addresses two critical challenges facing our communities: the severe 
shortage of affordable housing causing an increase in cost burdened households and the 
subsequent displacement of local families. By providing grants for ADU construction while 
ensuring long-term affordability through deed restrictions, this bill offers a practical solution that 
could create immediate housing opportunities while preserving them for Hawaii's workforce. 
Approximately 56% of households across the state are rent-burdened, that is spending more 
than 30% of their income on rent1 
Additionally, this bill addresses concerns which were expressed by community members after 
the passing of Act 39 by providing financial means for our local homeowners to participate in 
and contribute to addressing our housing shortage as well as making Hawaii a place where 
residents can remain. 
We strongly support this measure for several key reasons: 
Addresses Financial Barriers: Estimates for ADU construction in Hawaii is about 
$250-$350 per square feet2. Many homeowners who wish to build ADUs to help address 
our housing crisis face significant financial barriers. The grant program will make it 
possible for more moderate-income homeowners to participate in creating housing 
solutions. 
Protects Local Workforce: The deed restriction requirements ensuring occupancy by 
local workers, maintaining employment within the county, demonstrate a thoughtful 
approach to preserving housing for Hawaii's working families. This helps prevent the 
conversion of these units to vacation rentals or investment properties and help establish 
a locals only market. 
2 
https://www.talbuilders.com/adu/#:~:text=How%20Much%20Do%20ADUs%20Cost,to%20$350%20per%
20square%20foot.  
1 https://uhero.hawaii.edu/wp-content/uploads/2024/05/HawaiiHousingFactbook2024.pdf  

 
 
 
 
Testimony of the Hawai‘i Appleseed Center for Law and Economic Justice 
Support for HB 740 – Relating to Housing 
House Committee on Housing 
Wednesday, January 30, 2025 at 9:15AM Conf. Rm. 430  and via Videoconference 
 
 
Creates Sustainable Solutions: The perpetual deed restrictions ensure that these 
housing units will remain available for local workers and residents for generations to 
come, creating a lasting legacy of workforce housing that grows over time as more 
homeowners participate in the program. 
Empowers Residents to Actively Contribute: This program enables resident 
homeowners to play an active role in addressing Hawaii's housing challenges, 
empowering them to become part of the solution and directly contribute to building a 
stronger, more sustainable community. 
The bill also includes important accountability measures, such as annual reporting requirements 
and clear qualification criteria for both property owners and tenants. These provisions help 
ensure the program serves its intended purpose while remaining transparent and accountable to 
the public. 
Aligned with Hawaii Appleseed’s mission to promote social and economic justice, we view this 
program as an essential tool for tackling Hawaii's housing crisis while helping working 
families stay rooted in their communities. By pairing financial assistance with long-term 
affordability requirements, the program strikes a thoughtful balance that benefits both present 
and future generations. 
We respectfully urge your committee to pass HB 740. This legislation represents a significant 
step forward in creating sustainable, community-based solutions to our housing challenges 
while protecting opportunities for local working families and establishing a true “locals only” 
housing market. 
Mahalo for the opportunity to testify on this measure. 
Sincerely, 
Arjuna Heim 
Director of Housing Policy 

 
    C L A R E N C E  T .  C .  C H I N G  C A M P U S   1 8 2 2  K e ‘ e a u m o k u  S t r e e t ,  H o n o l u l u ,  H I  9 6 8 2 2  
    P h o n e  ( 8 0 8 ) 5 2 7 - 4 8 1 3    
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF HB 740:  RELATING TO HOUSING 
 
TO:  
House Committee on Housing 
 
FROM: 
Tina Andrade, President and CEO, Catholic Charities Hawai`i 
 
Hearing: 
Wednesday, 1/29/25; 9:15 AM; CR 430  & Videoconference 
 
Chair Evslin, Vice Chair Miyake, and Members, Committee on Housing: 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in Support HB 740, which establishes the 
Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program.  It allocates funds to the 
counties for grants to eligible homeowners/homebuyers to develop accessory dwelling units and 
to purchase deed restrictions on these properties. 
 
Catholic Charities Hawai`i (CCH) is a tax exempt, non-profit agency that has been providing 
social services in Hawai`i for over 75 years.  CCH has programs serving elders, children, 
families, homeless and immigrants.  Our mission is to provide services and advocacy to the most 
vulnerable of the people in Hawai`i.  Creating affordable housing and ending homelessness are 
our top priorities. 
 
Hawai`i is in critical need of more housing for our local residents, as soon as possible.  Creating 
accessory dwelling units (ADU) could more rapidly produce many housing units as well as 
securing these units for local residents, particularly our workforce.  Many studies have reported 
that a high percentage of our workforce is considering moving away from Hawai`i.  A major 
reason is the lack of housing which drives up rents.  Assisting property owners to build an ADU, 
on their own land, can provide more options in our housing tool box.   
 
Catholic Charities Hawai`i urges your support of this bill.   
 
If you have any questions, please contact our Legislative Liaison, Betty Lou Larson, at (808) 
527-4813.  

 
Hawai‘i YIMBY 
Honolulu, HI 96814 
hawaiiyimby.org 
info@hawaiiyimby.org 
 
January 29, 2025 
House Committee on Housing 
Hawai‘i State Capitol 
Honolulu, HI 96813 
 
RE: SUPPORT for HB 740 - RELATING TO HOUSING 
 
Aloha Chair Evslin, Vice Chair Miyake, and Members of the Committee, 
 
On behalf of Hawai‘i YIMBY, we are writing in support of HB 740 which would establish 
the Additional Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program, funding and 
allowing counties to purchase voluntary deed restrictions from eligible homeowners and 
homebuyers. Those eligible may use the funds towards the cost of constructing an ADU. 
ADUs are an important type of housing that adds gentle density to existing, established 
neighborhoods. ADUs can house a young professional, a retired grandparent, or many 
other members of the community. However, many homeowners lack the money to build an 
ADU, despite having the willingness and space. 
We believe in fixing incentives, and this includes creating innovative and targeted 
incentives. Hawai‘i homebuyers continue to struggle to compete with non-Hawai‘i buyers 
both because of lack of funds and a non-dedicated housing stock. This innovative 
incentive will let counties purchase voluntary deed restrictions that require the 
owner-occupant and/or renters be recently retired from or is a full time employee of a 
Hawai‘i business, with appropriate protections for those experiencing involuntary 
unemployment or disability. In the long-term, more homeowners would volunteer for the 
deed restriction and build ADUs. This will create a stock of homes dedicated to those who 
work and live in Hawai‘i. 
1 

 
Hawai‘i YIMBY 
Honolulu, HI 96814 
hawaiiyimby.org 
info@hawaiiyimby.org 
 
This alone will not solve the housing crisis, however, it will increase our overall supply of 
housing. Although small, building ADUs on plots of land that previously only had one unit, 
increasing the number of units on that same plot to two or three, is a much more efficient 
and affordable use of space. 
Hawai‘i YIMBY (Yes In My Backyard) is a volunteer-led grassroots advocacy organization 
dedicated to supporting bold and effective solutions for Hawai‘i’s devastating housing 
crisis. Our members are deeply concerned about Hawai‘i’s chronic and worsening housing 
shortage, which has caused home prices to rise much faster than incomes and pushes 
thousands of kamaʻāina out to the mainland or into homelessness every single year. 
We ask your support for this bill. Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
 
Sincerely, 
Damien Waikoloa 
Chapter Lead, Hawai‘i YIMBY 
 
Edgardo Díaz Vega 
Chapter Lead, Hawai‘i YIMBY 
 
 
2 

 
OUR MISSION 
To support and advance public policies 
that make Hawai‘i affordable for all 
working families. 
OUR VISION 
Collaborative, sustainable, and 
evidence-based public policies that 
create a diverse and sustainable 
Hawai‘i economy, an abundance of 
quality job opportunities, and a future 
where all working families living in 
Hawai‘i can thrive. 
BOARD MEMBERS 
Jason Fujimoto 
Meli James, Board Chair 
Micah Kāne 
Brandon Kurisu 
Brad Nicolai 
Mike Pietsch 
Sunshine Topping 
ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
Josh Feldman 
Brittany Heyd 
Alicia Moy 
Ed Schultz 
Josh Wisch 
President & Executive Director 
827 Fort Street Mall, 2nd Floor 
Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96813 
+1 (808) 542-4089 
info@holomuacollaborative.org 
HolomuaCollaborative.org 
Page 1 of 2 
 
 
 
 
 
Committee:  
 
House Committee on Housing 
Bill Number:  
 
HB 740, Relating to Housing 
Hearing Date and Time: January 29, 2025, 09:15am (Room 430) 
Re: 
 
 
Testimony of Holomua Collaborative – Support  
 
Aloha Chair Evslin, Vice Chair Miyake, and members of the committee: 
 
Mahalo for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of HB740, Relating to 
Housing.  This bill would establish and fund the Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and 
Deed Restriction Program. 
 
Hawai‘i remains in a housing crisis. Skyrocketing home prices leave many local 
families struggling to secure safe, attainable places to live. The median home price in 
Hawai‘i now exceeds $800,000—an impossible amount for most residents. As a result, 
many local families are being forced to leave in search of affordable living options 
elsewhere. Between July 2022 and July 2023 alone, an average of twelve people left 
Hawai‘i every day.1 More Native Hawaiians now live outside Hawai‘i than within it. This 
is a loss of our culture, traditions, and the essence of what makes Hawai‘i home. 
 
In October 2024, a survey2 gathering information about the day-to-day financial 
experience of local workers was released and it suggests this growing crisis has the 
potential to reach staggering levels. When nearly 1,500 local workers were asked if 
they may need to move to a less expensive state, only thirty-one percent answered a 
definitive “no,” while sixty-nine percent said “yes” or “unsure.” And nearly two-thirds 
of the respondents said the cost of housing was the primary impact on their cost of 
living in Hawai‘i. Each local worker and family we lose to the continent contributes to 
a loss of our economy, our culture, and our family. 
 
A Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism (DBEDT) study from 
March 2024 found that Hawai‘i needs to grow it’s housing stock by between 2,482 and 
4,112 per year from 2025 to 2035 to meet housing demand. 3 
The Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) Financing and Deed Restriction Program is a 
voluntary initiative that would create a dedicated housing supply for local residents by  
 
 
1 U.S. Census Bureau, Population Division Estimates, released on March 14, 2024; and 
calculations by the Hawai‘i State Department of Business, Economic Development & 
Tourism, Hawai‘i State Data Center. 
https://files.hawaii.gov/dbedt/census/popestimate/2023/county-
pop/2023_daily_est_counties.pdf 
 
2 https://holomuacollective.org/survey/  
 
3 Hawaii Housing Demand: 2025-2035  
https://files.hawaii.gov/dbedt/economic/reports/hawaii_housing_demand_2024_fina
l.pdf 

 
 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
empowering the Counties to purchase perpetual deed restrictions on properties that 
require occupants to live and work in Hawai‘i in return for the construction costs of an  
ADU. In the face of our state's ongoing housing crisis, this program represents an 
important investment in building the housing units necessary to meet our housing 
demands. 
 
We do respectfully request one amendment. As written, Page 4, lines 9-12, of the 
current draft of House Bill 740 appears to require the counties to apply to the Hawai‘i 
Housing Finance & Development Corporation (HHFDC) for funding each and every 
time they  purchase a single deed restriction pursuant to this program. Requiring the 
counties to apply for a funding each time it has successfully negotiated for the 
purchase of a deed restriction is an additional step that could delay a timely purchase 
or even prevent an eligible homeowner or homebuyer from choosing to participate in 
the program. Accordingly, we respectfully request that the bill be amended to provide 
each county an annual lump sum, as determined by HHFDC, for the county to use 
when purchasing deed restrictions through the program. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Joshua Wisch 
President & Executive Director 

Housing Hawai‘i’s Future 
PO Box 3043 
Honolulu, HI 96802-3043 
 
January 29, 2025 
TO: 
Chair Evslin and members of the House Housing Committee 
RE: 
SB 740 RELATING TO HOUSING. 
Dear Chair Evslin and Committee Members, 
Housing Hawai‘i’s Future is a nonprofit dedicated to creating opportunities for 
Hawai‘i’s next generation by ending the workforce housing shortage. 
We support the establishment of the Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) Financing and 
Deed Restriction program through HB 740. 
Local families with existing ADU capacity on their residential lots often lack the 
capital necessary to gain financing for the construction of new housing. We need to 
stimulate ADU construction while generating a new, permanent market of affordable 
workforce housing for residents.  
We support the construction of accessory dwelling units as a strategy for generating 
more affordable housing across Hawai‘i. HB 740 will tangibly operationalize the 
Accessory Dwelling Unit Act of 2024, known also as Act 39, SLH 2024,  
Placing new ADUs under deed restrictions will guarantee that this housing remains 
workforce housing. As HHF concluded in our sixth policy brief, deed restrictions are 
an underutilized mechanism for meeting our housing needs.1  
We are grateful for your careful consideration of HB 740.  
Thank you, 
 
 
 
Lee Wang​
​
​
​
​
​
Perry Arrasmith 
Executive Director​ ​
​
​
​
Director of Policy 
Housing Hawai‘i’s Future​
​
​
​
Housing Hawai‘i’s Future 
lee@hawaiisfuture.org ​
​
​
​
perry@hawaiisfuture.org  
1 Housing Hawai‘i's Future. "Policy Brief #6: Deed Restrictions in Maui County." 2024. 
https://www.hawaiisfuture.org/resources/policy-brief-mau-deed-restrictions. 
hawaiisfuture.org 
 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

 
 
 
Testimony in Support of HB 740, Relating to Housing 
 
From: Micah Kāne, Chief Executive Officer & President - Hawaiʻi Community Foundation 
 
Re:  Support for the Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program 
 
The Hawaiʻi Community Foundation (HCF) supports HB 740, which establishes the Accessory Dwelling 
Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program. Housing is a priority area within HCF’s CHANGE 
Framework under the “C” sector of Community-Centered Economy. Per UHERO, “median housing costs 
in Hawaii are more than 2.7 times the national level”1 and median rents are the highest in the country.2  
ALICE families are more vulnerable because of our current housing market. 
   
The demand for attainable local housing currently enveloping Hawaiʻi is at crisis levels. Too many people 
who do not live or work in Hawai‘i are owning and driving up the costs of our housing market, which 
contributes to a record outmigration of local residents. The agony of this dynamic punctuated by the 
fact that more Hawaiians now live out of Hawaiʻi than in Hawaiʻi.   
 
While efforts to address the housing crisis have shown progress, it is evident that the current 
perspectives and efforts need to be expanded, and new creative solutions must be adopted. Hyper 
prioritization of major off-site infrastructure improvements that can effectuate housing, broad-based 
collaboration and regulatory reform are more critical now than ever.   
 
We support the creation of the Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program 
because it represents a new and creative solution. The program envisioned by this bill will 
simultaneously increase our housing supply while also dedicating units to be used for local workforce 
housing. Each deed restriction sold under this program is a promise to the community that another 
home is available for a working family in perpetuity.  
 
Kamaʻāina want to stay in Hawaiʻi and HB 740 can open that door and provide that hope. There is 
universal agreement that locals need more places to call home. Homes must be affordable so residents 
will be free from the pressure of leaving the island. HB 740 is an innovative solution that contributes to 
more housing for our community, and HCF is happy to support it.  
 
 
 
1 UHERO 2023 Hawaii Housing Factbook at page 1. 
2 UHERO 2024 Hawaii Housing Factbook at page 6. 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

 
 
 
January 29, 2025 
 
Tes$mony in support of HB 740, Rela$ng to Housing 
 
Aloha Chair Evslin, Vice Chair Miyake, and Committee Members, 
 
We write in support of HB 740, Relating to Housing, which would establish the Accessory 
Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed RestricLon Program to place voluntary deed restricLons on 
homes and accessory dwelling units (ADU) that will be dedicated for local working residents in 
exchange for the ﬁnancing the construcLon of an ADU.  
 
Title Guaranty of Hawai‘i is the oldest and largest Ltle company in the state. We have been 
owned and operated by a kama‘aina family since 1896 and we are proud to employ over 250 
residents who work in our branches across the state. As an organizaLon that has worked for 
over a century to help connect local families with housing, we see ﬁrsthand the economic shiZ 
that is prevenLng local families from achieving the dream of homeownership. 
 
The Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed RestricLon Program is an innovaLve proposal 
to create a new pool of residenLal real estate that is restricted to local residents while building 
new housing units. This will enable locals to get into Hawaii’s Lght housing market by restricLng 
housing stock for local families and promoLng a local workforce. This program is oﬀering 
property sellers and buyers ﬁnancing for the construcLon of an ADU on their property in 
exchange for voluntarily placing a deed restricLon on their property that restricts the types of 
future buyers and/or tenants to Hawai‘i residents. The proposal accomplishes this by tying the 
voluntary deed restricLon to residency and work requirements. It enables locals to compete 
with mainland buyers when buying a home and it also encourage property owners to rent to 
locals long term instead of leaving homes vacant. 
 
HB 740 is an original solution that invests in our community and in culture, and I hope that you 
support this effort to keep local residents in Hawai‘i. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mike B. Pietsch 
President and Chief OperaLng Oﬃcer 
Title Guaranty of Hawai‘i 

 
 
 
 
 
680 Iwilei Rd 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
     
(808) 354-1238 
Suite 420               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aloha@manauphawaii.com 
Honolulu, HI 96817 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
            
manauphawaii.com 
 
Statement of 
Meli James and Brittany Heyd 
Cofounders 
Mana Up  
 
HB740, Relating to Housing 
 
Aloha Chair Evslin, Vice Chair Miyake, and committee members, 
 
We support HB740, which establishes the Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction 
Program to provide voluntary deed restrictions to willing eligible homeowners and homebuyers who 
agree to limit the use of their property for local working occupants in exchange for funding to help the 
construction of an accessory dwelling unit (ADU). 
 
Mana Up is a statewide initiative that helps provide entrepreneurs in Hawai‘i with the resources and tools 
to grow their business and scale globally. As these entrepreneurs continue to grow, they also help 
contribute to our expanding our local economy. As part of our mission, we aim to sustain the local 
economy through economic diversification, local job creation, community giveback, investment, and a 
regenerative culture of entrepreneurship – providing a better future for generations to come here in 
Hawai‘i. To keep these types of entrepreneurs in Hawai’i and even expand our entrepreneurial 
ecosystem, though, these entrepreneurs need a place to live that they can afford.  
 
We repeatedly hear from our entrepreneurs about the difficultly they have in finding attainable housing 
that provides them the safety and security necessary to focus on their business and family. Local 
entrepreneurs want to create and expand their business in Hawai‘i, but far too often feel that opportunities 
for housing and business are better on the continent. 
 
Creating a dedicated housing stock for our local workforce will help our families have security as they 
navigate the difficult economic conditions that face the State. The Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and 
Deed Restriction Program incentivizes local homeowners and buyers to voluntarily be a part of the 
solution to create a permanent dedicated housing stock for local families.  Housing is a challenge for 
everyone, and by coming together, we can find shared solutions that help all the people of Hawai‘i. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Meli James | Cofounder, Mana Up 
Brittany Heyd | Cofounder, Mana Up 

 
 
1 
 
Testimony to  
House Committee on Housing 
January 29, 2025 
9:15 AM 
Conference Room 430 & VIA videoconference  
Hawaii State Capitol 
HB 740 
  
Aloha Chair Evslin, Vice Chair Miyake, and members of the Committee, 
 
We write in support of HB 740. This bill will increase our housing supply for local working 
families in Hawaiʻi. 
 
Established in 1904, Hawaiʻi Gas serves over 70,000 customers on all islands through its utility 
pipeline infrastructure and propane business, all of whom depend on the company for 
sustainable, reliable, and affordable gas for water heating, cooking, drying, and other 
commercial and industrial applications. The company employs some 350 professionals, over 
75% of whom are under collective bargaining.  
 
The stability of our local workforce is directly tied to the ability of local families to live and work 
in Hawaiʻi. Housing instability has a direct impact on the workforce’s ability to remain in the 
state and to continue supporting the essential infrastructure that allows businesses like ours to 
thrive and serve the public. 
 
Our company relies on a dedicated workforce of technicians, engineers, and support staff who 
ensure that the gas services we provide are safe, reliable, and accessible to all residents. 
However, the rising cost of housing makes it increasingly difficult for these essential workers to 
remain in the state. The Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program offers 
a meaningful solution by ensuring that local families can secure housing in their communities 
through deed restricted housing and the construction of accessory dwelling units, thereby 
providing a stable and skilled workforce that is essential to industries like ours. 
 
HB 740 addresses long-term workforce sustainability, ensuring that employees who work in 
critical infrastructure sectors like energy can stay in Hawai‘i and continue their work without 
the constant threat of displacement. It is a smart, forward-thinking solution that will benefit all 
sectors of our economy. 
 
We urge you to support HB 740, as it represents an investment in Hawaii’s workforce, 
infrastructure, and long-term prosperity. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.  
 
 

 
 
 
January 29, 2025 
 
Committee:  
House Committee on Housing 
Bill Number:  
HB740, Relating to Housing 
Hearing Date and Time: 
 
January 29, 2025, 9:15am 
Re: 
 
 
 
 
Testimony of HPM Building Supply in Support  
 
Dear Chair Evslin, Vice Chair Miyake, and Committee Members: 
  
I would like to submit this testimony in support of HB740, Relating to Housing. The purpose of HB740 is 
to create a dedicated local housing market through the establishment of the Accessory Dwelling Unit 
Financing and Deed Restriction Program. 
  
HPM Building Supply is a 100% employee-owned company serving Hawaii's home improvement market 
and building industry for over 100 years since 1921. With 18 locations across Hawai‘i and Washington 
State, HPM offers various services and products, including retail stores, building supply and lumber 
yards, home design centers, drafting and design services, and manufacturing facilities. HPM is dedicated 
to enhancing homes, improving lives, and transforming communities.   
 
A significant portion of our workforce consists of skilled tradespeople like carpenters, electricians, and 
plumbers, all of whom are integral to the construction process. However, as housing prices rise and rental 
prices soar, these workers are forced to leave the state in search of more affordable living situations. The 
result is a shortage of skilled labor in the construction sector, leading to delays and higher costs for 
homeowners and developers alike. The Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction 
Program offers a solution to this by ensuring that local workers have a place to live in the same 
communities where they work. 
 
HB 740’s approach—creating deed-restricted housing and constructing accessory dwelling units 
dedicated to local working residents—will help stabilize the housing market by giving local workers a 
fighting chance in a competitive market in which wealthier non-residents often have an advantage. With 
more local residents able to afford homes and stay in the state we will have a stronger, more sustainable 
construction industry that benefits everyone, from homeowners to contractors and beyond. 
 
I ask for your support of HB740, as it provides the foundation for a more robust, locally employed, and 
efficient building industry that will meet the needs of Hawaii’s growing population. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Jason Fujimoto 
Chairman & CEO 
 

 
 
 
 
Testimony in Support of HB 740, Relating to Housing 
 
 
 
 
Aloha Chair Evslin, Vice Chair Miyake, and members of the Committee, 
 
We write in strong support of HB 740 which will establish the Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed 
Restriction Program allowing interested homeowners and homebuyers to voluntarily sell a deed restriction on 
their property that limit the occupancy of the property to our local workforce. 
 
aio is a locally owned company with holdings across a broad range of industries. Our companies are purpose-
driven and firmly rooted in local values. At aio, Hawai‘i is at our core, and through our products and services, 
we work hard to make Hawai‘i a better place for future generations. 
 
Hawaiʻi is in the midst of a housing crisis. Our employees are our greatest asset, and we want to ensure that 
they have access to quality and attainable housing. This program is a good first step at establishing a housing 
market that is dedicated to local working families rather than out-of-state purchasers.  
 
Mahalo for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of HB 740. 
 
 
 
Brandon Kurisu 
aio Family of Companies 

 
 
 
January 29, 2025 
 
Aloha Chair Evslin, Vice Chair Miyake, and members of the Committee, 
 
We write in support of HB 740 and the creation of the Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and 
Deed Restriction Program. 
Tori Richard has manufactured in Honolulu nearly 70 years, and we continue to proudly do so 
today. As a long-time medium-sized Hawai‘i employer, we recognize the challenge high housing 
costs pose to everyone working to make ends meet in Hawai‘i.  
Our business is deeply committed to supporting Hawaii’s local workforce, but the growing 
housing crisis makes it increasingly difficult for our employees to remain in the islands. 
Attainable housing is key to keeping talented, creative people in Hawai‘i, and this bill offers a 
much-needed solution to that challenge. 
Many of our employees are struggling to find attainable places to live. As their employer, I see 
firsthand the impact this has on their lives. When workers are forced to move away or leave the 
state altogether, it hurts our ability to operate and expand. The Accessory Dwelling Unit 
Financing and Deed Restriction Program ensures that local workers, like those in the fashion, 
manufacturing, and retail industries, have a place to call home. This stability will allow them to 
continue contributing to Hawai‘i’s vibrant economy and support local businesses. 
Moreover, as a company that takes pride in being part of the local community, we understand the 
importance of preserving Hawaii’s unique cultural identity. The housing crisis threatens that 
identity, as local residents are pushed out by non-resident investors and wealthy buyers. HB 740 
will help reverse this trend by providing a steady supply of attainable homes dedicated to local 
residents through the building of accessory dwelling units and restriction of homes for use by our 
local residents, ensuring that our workforce and community remain strong and diverse. 
I urge you to support HB 740, as it is essential to the future of our business and the local 
economy. Thank you for your consideration. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Josh Feldman 
President & CEO 
Tori Richard, Ltd. 

 
REALTOR® is a registered collective membership mark which may be used only by real estate professionals 
who are members of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS® and subscribe to its strict Code of Ethics. 
 
808-733-7060    
    1259 A‘ala Street, Suite 300 
        
 
                 Honolulu, HI 96817 
808-737-4977  
 
January 29, 2025 
 
The Honorable Luke A. Evslin, Chair 
House Committee on Housing 
State Capitol, Conference Room 430 & Videoconference 
 
RE: House Bill 740, Relating to Housing 
 
HEARING: Wednesday, January 29, 2024, at 9:15 a.m. 
 
 
Aloha Chair Evslin, Vice Chair Miyake, and Members of Committee: 
 
My name is Lyndsey Garcia, Director of Advocacy, testifying on behalf of the 
Hawai‘i Association of REALTORS® (“HAR”), the voice of real estate in Hawaii and its 
over 10,000 members. HAR provides comments on House Bill 740, which establishes 
the Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program to allocate funds 
to the counties to provide grants to eligible homeowners or homebuyers to finance 
construction costs, development costs, and non-reoccurring closing costs associated 
with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit and purchase deed restrictions on 
such property. 
 
Hawai‘i REALTORS® supports the creation of accessory dwelling units to help 
increase the supply of housing and help address Hawaii’s housing challenges. We do 
however have concerns that the deed restrictions contained in this measure are in 
perpetuity. Having deed restrictions on a property in perpetuity can be problematic 
especially in land use planning, as communities can change and uses for a property 
may need to change as well over time. The Committee may want to consider instead 
that the deed restriction be amortized over 10 years. 
 
It is also important to note that homeowners can currently choose to sell their 
property to Hawaii residents.  We need to understand the challenges Hawaii residents 
face in purchasing a home in Hawaii. 
 
Mahalo for the opportunity to provide testimony on this measure. 
 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

 
 
 
To advance and promote a healthy economic environment 
for business, advocating for a responsive government and 
quality education, while preserving Maui’s unique  
community characteristics. 
 
 
HEARING BEFORE THE HOUSE COMMITTEE ON HOUSING 
HAWAII STATE CAPITOL, HOUSE CONFERENCE ROOM 430 
Wednesday, January 29, 2025 AT 9:15 A.M. 
  
To The Honorable Representative Luke A. Evslin, Chair 
The Honorable Representative Tyson K. Miyake, Vice Chair 
Members of the Committee on Housing 
 
SUPPORT HB740 RELATING TO HOUSING 
  
The Maui Chamber of Commerce wholeheartedly SUPPORTS HB740 which establishes the Accessory 
Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program to allocate funds to the counties to provide 
grants to eligible homeowners or homebuyers to finance construction costs, development costs, and 
non-reoccurring closing costs associated with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit and 
purchase deed restrictions on such property. 
 
Housing is a top priority for the Maui Chamber of Commerce and continues to be so as the crisis 
escalates following the wildfires and it directly impacts businesses and our economic revitalization. 
Before the wildfires, we needed over 10,000 units by 2025, but that number has only increased as 3% 
of our housing was lost in Lahaina. This is one of the main factors in the ever-increasing pricing of 
housing. 
 
This is another excellent tool in the toolbox for housing. 
 
For these reasons, we SUPPORT HB740. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Pamela Tumpap 
President 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

HB-740 
Submitted on: 1/27/2025 4:05:16 PM 
Testimony for HSG on 1/29/2025 9:15:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Stacey Alapai 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Please support this effort to keep local homes in local hands. Deed restrictions and assistance 
with building ADUs will both create new housing and maintain existing housing.  
 

HB-740 
Submitted on: 1/28/2025 11:01:01 AM 
Testimony for HSG on 1/29/2025 9:15:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Leo Nahe Smith 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I support bill HB 740. Community Land Trusts and deed restriction programs are necessary to 
keep local homes and land in the hands of locals. Lets kakoʻo ʻohana and not foreigners who 
have no ties to Hawaiʻi Loa. 
Na, 
Leo Nahe 
 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

HB-740 
Submitted on: 1/28/2025 12:44:28 PM 
Testimony for HSG on 1/29/2025 9:15:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Joy Dillon 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha,  HSG, JHA & FIN Committee Chairs and Members. 
I support this bill and believe that it will contribute to housing in Hawaii.  Please vote YES.  
Thank you. 
 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

HB-740 
Submitted on: 1/28/2025 8:00:15 PM 
Testimony for HSG on 1/29/2025 9:15:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Christine Otto Zaa 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I support HB740 with a request for an affordability requirement of at least 100% AMI or lower. 
Please also include language that forbids short term rental use. Mahalo! 
 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 
