 
SYLVIA LUKE 
L I E U T E N A N T  G O V E R N O R  
Ke Keʻena O Ka Hope Kiaʻāina 
 
 
The 33rd Legislature, State of Hawaii 
Senate Committee on Economic Development and Tourism 
March 11, 2025 
 
Testimony on 
H.B. 934 - RELATING TO THE HAWAII BROADBAND AND  
DIGITAL EQUITY OFFICE 
 
Chair DeCoite, Vice Chair Wakai, and Members of the Committee: 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in support of H.B. 934, H.D. 1 which 
transfers the Hawaii Broadband Office from the Department of Business, Economic 
Development, and Tourism (DBEDT) to the Office of Enterprise Technology Services 
(ETS) in the Department of Accounting and General Services, establishes a special fund, 
and appropriates additional funding. In addition, we offer proposed amendments for the 
Committee’s consideration. 
 
Reliable, affordable high speed internet access is essential for ensuring greater 
educational, economic, and social opportunities for all. The federal and state 
governments have committed over $400 million to modernize our subsea and terrestrial 
infrastructure and equip residents with the tools and knowledge to safely navigate the 
internet. With the construction of new subsea broadband infrastructure, our state 
anticipates generating revenue from negotiated lease agreements and the creation of a 
separate fund will ensure these funds are used to reduce the cost of internet services, 
provide technical assistance to communities, and support broadband projects. Given the 
increasingly vital role of broadband in our daily lives, the transfer of the Broadband Office 
from DBEDT to ETS provides an opportunity to review and centralize broadband 
responsibilities currently dispersed across state government. 
 
To make the best use of federal funding and anticipate revenue while consolidating 
statewide broadband responsibilities, we propose the following amendments to H.B. 934, 
H.D. 1 for the Committee’s consideration: 
- 
simplify and streamline the name of the office from “Hawaii Broadband and 
Digital Equity Office” to “Broadband Office” 
 
 

H.B. 934, H.D. 1 
March 11, 2025 
Page 2 
 
 
 
- 
repeal the broadband duties assigned to the Director of the Department of 
Commerce and Consumer Affairs, outlined in Chapter 440G-11.5, Hawaii 
Revised Statutes 
- 
disband the Hawaii Broadband Assistance Advisory Council which was 
established by Act 199, Session Laws of Hawaii, 2010, and further 
amended in 2011 and 2016 
- 
add a federal fund appropriation for digital navigator positions 
- 
change the name and type of fund being created from the “Broadband and 
Digital Equity Special Fund” to the “Broadband Revolving Fund,” and add 
the necessary language to support the creation of a revolving fund 
- 
re-insert a one-time appropriation of $200,000 into the newly created 
broadband revolving fund and specify that the appropriation is for the 
reimbursement of contracts executed by the Broadband Office, enabling 
timely reimbursement to non-profit organizations while the Broadband 
Office draws down on federal funding. The intent is to return the full amount 
back to the General Fund in 5 years. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in support with proposed amendments 
to H.B. 934, H.D. 1. 
  

JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
    GOVERNOR 
    KE KIAʻĀINA 
 
                              
 
STATE OF HAWAIʻI | KA MOKUʻĀINA O HAWAIʻI 
DEPARTMENT OF ACCOUNTING AND GENERAL SERVICES | KA ʻOIHANA LOIHELU A LAWELAWE LAULĀ 
 
OFFICE OF ENTERPRISE TECHNOLOGY SERVICES | KEʻENA HOʻOLANA ʻENEHANA 
 
P.O. BOX 119, HONOLULU, HAWAII 96810-0119 
 
Testimony of 
CHRISTINE M. SAKUDA 
Chief Information Officer 
Office of Enterprise Technology Services 
 
Before the 
 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND TOURISM 
Tuesday, March 11, 2025 
 
HOUSE BILL NO. 934 HD1 
RELATING TO THE HAWAIʻI BROADBAND AND DIGITAL EQUITY OFFICE 
  
Dear Chair DeCoite, Vice Chair Wakai, and members of the committee:  
  
The Office of Enterprise Technology Services (ETS) humbly offers comments on this bill 
that transfers the Hawaiʻi Broadband and Digital Equity Office (HBDEO) from the 
Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism to the Office of Enterprise 
Technology Services in the Department of Accounting and General Services (DAGS), 
establishes the Hawaiʻi Broadband and Digital Equity Special Fund, and appropriates 
funds. 
 
ETS strongly supports Connect Kākou, led by Governor Josh Green and Lieutenant 
Governor Sylvia Luke, to ensure that every resident of Hawai’i has access to broadband 
Internet – plus the skills and devices they need to use the Internet for economic, social, 
and community prosperity.   
 
Taking over the responsibility of running and managing the Hawaiʻi Broadband and Digital 
Equity Office will be a huge endeavor for ETS. Current ETS resources are focused 
internally to government to include enterprise IT governance, cybersecurity, data 
governance, and support of the state’s major modernization initiatives. We are unable to 
divert any resources to new endeavors so in order for the transfer to be successful, we 
would ask to be funded appropriately from both state and federal sources. 
 
According to the HBDEO’s Form A request (not approved for inclusion in the Governor’s 
executive budget) for Fiscal Year 25-27: “With the current budget of $360,000 to fund four 
staff and operating expenses, HBDEO has been operating with essentially no operating 
expenses for the past two fiscal years. Proper funding will enable the office to meet its 
objectives, especially in community outreach to rural, non-Oahu areas of the state.” 
KEITH A. REGAN 
COMPTROLLER 
KA LUNA HOʻOMALU HANA LAULĀ 
 
CHRISTINE M. SAKUDA 
CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER 
LUNA ʻENEHANA      

H.B. 934, H.D. 1 
Page 2  
 
 
The HBDEO had asked for $777,090 for FY 26 with $452,302 for personal services, and 
$324,788 for other expenses.  
 
ETS believes that these figures provide for a sound budget, and we ask that this funding 
be included in the bill. We believe that, without proper funding for both salaries and 
operations to manage the work the HBDEO is being tasked to do, moving the HBDEO to 
DAGS-ETS would not improve the functioning of the HBDEO but would in fact negatively 
impact critical services delivered through our existing program.  
Pursuant to Section 27-43, Hawaii Revised Statutes, ETS provides governance and 
strategic planning for executive branch IT projects and we believe managing the 
infrastructure operations of broadband fall within the purview of this office. Our statutory 
responsibilities are focused on the State’s enterprise IT infrastructure which has 
supported departments directly. We have concerns that a lack of adequate resources will 
dilute this internal focus by diverting resources needed for this public outreach. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on this measure. 

 
 
 
 
 JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
LT. GOVERNOR 
 
JAMES KUNANE TOKIOKA 
  DIRECTOR 
        
                      DANE K. WICKER 
                                DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
DEPARTMENT OF BUSINESS, 
 
 
 
 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT & TOURISM 
 
 
 
    KA ʻOIHANA HOʻOMOHALA PĀʻOIHANA, ʻIMI WAIWAI   
 
 
 
     A HOʻOMĀKAʻIKAʻI 
 
 
 
 
No. 1 Capitol District Building, 250 South Hotel Street, 5th Floor, Honolulu, Hawaii 96813 
 
Telephone:  (808) 586-2355 
 
 
 
 
Mailing Address:  P.O. Box 2359, Honolulu, Hawaii 96804 
 
 
 
 
Fax: 
(808) 586-2377 
 
 
 
 
Web site:  dbedt.hawaii.gov 
 
 
Statement of 
JAMES KUNANE TOKIOKA 
Director 
Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism 
before the 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND TOURISM 
 
Tuesday, March 11, 2025 
Time 1:00PM 
State Capitol, Conference Room #229 
 
In consideration of  
HB934 HD1 
RELATING TO THE HAWAII BROADBAND AND DIGITAL EQUITY OFFICE.  
 
Chair DeCoite, Vice Chair Wakai and members of the Committee.  The 
Department of Business, Economic Development and Tourism (DBEDT) provides the 
following comments on HB934 HD1 that transfers the Hawaii Broadband and Digital 
Equity Office (HBDEO) to the Office of Enterprise Technology Services in the 
Department of Accounting and General Services.   
HBDEO has provided steady leadership in state broadband and digital equity. I 
am confident that regardless of where the Office resides in state government, the Office 
will continue to provide the necessary leadership and accountability in carrying out its 
statutory responsibilities and in deployment and management of federal funds. DBEDT 
will continue to collaborate with the Office as it is an important piece to the future of 
digital workforce and economic development. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 

 
 
STATE OF HAWAII | KA MOKUʻĀINA ʻO HAWAIʻI 
OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
KA ʻOIHANA PILI KĀLEPA 
335 MERCHANT STREET, ROOM 310 
P.O. BOX 541 
HONOLULU, HAWAII 96809 
Phone Number:  (808) 586-2850 
Fax Number:  (808) 586-2856 
cca.hawaii.gov 
 
Testimony of the Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs 
 
Before the  
Senate Committee on Economic Development and Tourism 
 
Tuesday, March 11, 2025 
1:00 p.m. 
Conference Room 229 & Via Videoconference 
 
On the following measure: 
H.B. 934, RELATING TO THE HAWAII BROADBAND  
AND DIGITAL EQUITY OFFICE 
 
Chair DeCoite, Vice Chair Wakai, and Members of the Committee: 
 
My name is Randy Leong, and I am the Cable Television Administrator of the 
Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs’ (“Department”) Cable Television 
Division.  The Department supports this bill and requests two amendments.  
 
The purpose of this bill is to transfer the Hawaiʻi Broadband and Digital Equity 
Office (“HBDEO”) from the Department of Business, Economic Development, and 
Tourism to the Office of Enterprise Technology Services Department of Accounting and 
General Services; establish the Broadband and Digital Equity Special Fund; and 
appropriate funds. 
The Department respectfully requests amending this bill by:  (1) incorporating the 
language of S.B.1045, which deletes obsolete functions and consolidates the state’s 
broadband functions into the HBDEO through the repeal of HRS Section 440G-11.5 and 
Act 199, Section 3, as amended; and (2) consolidating the duty of collecting and posting 
JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR | KE KIAʻĀINA 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR | KA HOPE KIAʻĀINA 
NADINE Y. ANDO 
DIRECTOR | KA LUNA HOʻOKELE 
 
DEAN I. HAZAMA 
DEPUTY DIRECTOR | KA HOPE LUNA HOʻOKELE 
 
 

broadband infrastructure notices pursuant to Section 2 of Act 151 (Session Laws of 
Hawaii 2011), as amended by Act 264 (Session Laws of Hawaii 2013) and Act 193 
(Session Laws of Hawaii 2016) from the Department to the HBDEO (see attachment, 
pg.3, line 21). This little-used provision requires the Department to collect and post online 
notices of certain actions relating to broadband infrastructure on existing utility poles and 
conduits which use existing infrastructure and facilities. The online notices are for 
expedited projects which are exempt from county and state permitting and approval 
requirements, so long as 30-days’ notice is provided in advance.      
The Department finds it prudent and beneficial to conserve taxpayer resources by 
consolidating broadband and related duties under one state agency.  This would also 
reduce confusion by having one state office in which the public can be referred to and 
contact for broadband issues and matters. The transfer of broadband duties from the 
Department will not negatively impact services to the public due to significant overlaps in 
the Department’s broadband functions which are already undertaken by other 
government agencies.  The requested amendments simply provide for the transfer of the 
enumerated tasks in HRS Section 440G-11.5 to the HBDEO which would eliminate this 
overlap in duties.  
Due to changes in broadband infrastructure funding and public policy in recent 
years, the Department has occupied a secondary role to other state agencies who are 
leading broadband infrastructure development and digital equity initiatives. As such, the 
Department supports this measure and our requested amendments which are the repeal 
of HRS Section 440G-11.5 and Act 199, as amended; along with the transfer of duties 
pursuant to Section 2 of Act 151, as amended, from the Department to HBDEO. The 
Department defers to the other agencies regarding the other sections of this bill which 
affect those agencies.               
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this bill. 
 
 
 
 
Attachment to follow 

ATTACHMENT TO DCCA TESTIMONY – EDT HEARING 
(Act 151 Session Laws of Hawaii 2011)  
 
BE IT .ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII: 
1 
SECTION 1. Act 199, Session Laws of Hawaii 2010,  
2 
established a broadband work group to develop procedures for 
3 
streamlining permitting functions applicable to the development 
4 
of broadband services and broadband technology. The legislature 
5 
finds that the broadband work group has recommended the creation 
6 
of an exemption from various permitting requirements for the 
7 
installation of new or upgraded broadband infrastructure along 
8 
existing poles and conduits that are already used for 
9 
telecommunications. Another discussion item of the broadband 
10 
work group is the streamlining of the processing of pole, 
11 
conduit, and duct applications. 
12 
The purpose of this Act is to facilitate the deployment of 
13 
high-speed broadband infrastructure in Hawaii by exempting the 
14 
installation, improvement, construction, or development of 
15 
infrastructure relating to broadband service or broadband 
16 
technology from state and county permitting requirements, under 
17 
certain conditions, and reducing the time and costs associated 
18 
with requests for access to utility poles and conduits. This

Page2 
1342 
 
H.B. NO. 
H.D.1 
S.D.2 
C.D.1 
 
 
1  Act also makes the director of commerce and consumer affairs a 
2- member and chairperson of the broadband assistance advisory 
3 
council and a member and convenor of the broadband work group 
4 
established under Act 199, Session Laws of Hawaii 2010, and 
5 
removes the cable television administrator from the broadband 
6 
assistance advisory council and the broadband work group. 
7 
SECTION 2. From January 1, 2012, to January 1, 2017, 
8 
actions relating to the installation, improvement, construction, 
9 
or development of infrastructure relating to broadband service 
10 
or broadband technology, including the interconnection of 
11 
telecommunications cables, shall be exempt from county 
12 
permitting requirements, state permitting and approval 
13 
requirements, which includes the requirements of chapters 171, 
14. 205A, and 343, Hawaii Revised Statutes, and public utilities 
15 
commission rules under Hawaii Administrative Rules, chapter 6- 
16 
73, that require existing installations to comply with new pole 
17 
replacement standards at the time of any construction or 
18 
alteration to the equipment or installation, except to the 
19 
extent that such permitting or approval is required by federal 
20 
law or is necessary to protect eligibility for federal funding, 
21 
services, or other assistance; provided that the installation, 
 
HB1342 CDl HMS 2011-4055 

Page3 
1342 
 
H.B. NO. 
H.D.1 
S.D.2 
C.D. 1 
 
 
 
1 
improvement, construction, or development of infrastructure 
2 
shall: 
3 
(1)  Be directly related to the improvement of existing 
4 
telecommunications cables or the installation of new 
5 
telecommunications cables: 
6 
(A) On existing or replacement utility poles and 
7 
conduits; and 
8 
(B)  Using existing infrastructure and facilities; 
9 
(2)  Take place within existing rights-of-way or public 
10 
utility easements or use existing telecommunications 
11 
infrastructure; and 
12 
(3) Make no significant changes to the existing public 
13 
rights-of-way, public utility easements, or 
14 
telecommunications infrastructure. 
15 
A person or entity shall use reasonable best efforts to 
16 
comply with all applicable safety and engineering requirements 
17 
relating to the installation, improvement, construction, or 
18 
development of infrastructure relating to broadband service. 
19 
A person or entity taking any action under this section 
20 
shall, at least thirty calendar days before the action is taken, 
21 
provide notice to the [director of commerce and consumer affairs] 
Hawaii broadband digital equity office  
 
HB1342 CDl HMS 2011-4055 

Page4 
134
 
H.B. NO. 
, H.D.1 
S.D.2 
C.D.1 
 
 
 
1 
by electronic posting in the form and on the site designated by 
 
2 
the director for such posting on the designated central State of 
3 
Hawaii Internet website; provided that notice need not be given 
4 
by a public utility or government entity for an action relating 
5 
to the installation, improvement, construction, or development 
6 
of infrastructure relating to broadband service or broadband 
 
7 
technology where the action taken is to provide access as the 
8 
owner of the existing rights-of-way, utility easements, or 
 
9 
telecommunications infrastructure. 
 
[remaining text omitted] 

UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I SYSTEM 
ʻŌNAEHANA KULANUI O HAWAIʻI   
Legislative Testimony 
Hōʻike Manaʻo I Mua O Ka ʻAhaʻōlelo 
_____________________________________________________________ 
Testimony Presented Before the 
Senate Committee on Economic Development and Tourism 
Tuesday, March 11, 2025 at 1:00 p.m. 
By 
Garret T. Yoshimi, Vice President for Information Technology/Chief Information Officer  
University of Hawai‘i System 
HB 934 HD1 – RELATING TO THE HAWAIʻI BROADBAND AND DIGITAL EQUITY 
OFFICE 
Chair DeCoite, Vice Chair Wakai, and Members of the Committee: 
The University of Hawai‘i, representing the interests of the State in the implementation 
of federally funded broadband investments, supports HB 934 HD1 which transfers the 
Hawai‘i Broadband and Digital Equity Office (HBDEO) from the Department of 
Business, Economic Development, and Tourism (DBEDT) to the Office of Enterprise 
Technology Services (ETS) in the Department of Accounting and General Services, and 
establishes the Hawai‘i Broadband and Digital Equity Special Fund.  Transfer of the 
HBDEO under ETS, would place it within the management and oversight of the State 
Chief Information Officer, and will properly align the functions of the HBDEO together 
with other statewide technology infrastructure oversight, management and operations.  
The measure additionally provides for appropriate governance under the statutorily 
established Information Technology Steering Committee. 
Establishment of the Hawai‘i Broadband and Digital Equity Special Fund provides for 
the ability to collect and expend funds received as a beneficial outcome of the public 
investment in broadband infrastructure assets; and to ensure the funds are used to 
support long term sustainability of the state's broadband infrastructure assets and the 
ability of our community to benefit from those infrastructure assets.  Placing the 
ownership of the assets resulting from the federal broadband investments under the 
State Chief Information Officer, together with the assistance of the Information 
Technology Steering Committee, will help to ensure the public's interest is protected 
and the benefits to Hawai‘i maximized over the lifetime of these assets.  To help provide 
clarity over the intent of the use of the funds, we suggest the fund be titled the Hawai‘i 
Broadband Special Fund. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in support of HB 934 HD1. 
 

 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAI῾I 
                                                       KA MOKU‘ĀINA O HAWAI‘I 
                                 STATE COUNCIL ON DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES 
                                'A'UNIKE MOKU'ĀPUNI NO KA NĀ KĀWAI KULA 
PRINCESS VICTORIA KAMĀMALU BUILDING 
1010 RICHARDS STREET, Room 122 
HONOLULU, HAWAI῾I 96813 
TELEPHONE: (808) 586-8100    FAX: (808) 586-7543 
 
March 11, 2025 
 
The Honorable Senator Lynn DeCoite, Chair 
Senate Committee on Economic Development and Tourism 
The Thirty-Third Legislature  
State Capitol 
State of Hawai῾i 
Honolulu, Hawai'i 96813 
 
Dear Senator DeCoite, and Committee Members: 
 
SUBJECT: HB934 HD1 Relating to the Hawai’i Broadband and Digital Equity Office 
The Hawai῾i State Council on Developmental Disabilities SUPPORTS HB934 HD1, which 
transfers the Hawaiʻi Broadband and Digital Equity Office from the Department of Business, Economic 
Development, and Tourism to the Office of Enterprise Technology Services in the Department of 
Accounting and General Services. Establishes the Broadband and Digital Equity Special Fund. 
Appropriates funds. Effective 7/1/3000. (HD1) 
Access to broadband and digital technology is critical for individuals with intellectual and 
developmental disabilities (I/DD) to fully participate in society. Reliable internet connectivity and digital 
literacy are essential for accessing telehealth services, engaging in educational opportunities, securing 
employment, and participating in community life. HB934 HD1 strengthens the State's infrastructure to 
ensure digital equity, especially for underserved and vulnerable populations. 
The proposed restructuring and the establishment of the special fund will enhance the State’s 
ability to develop and implement strategies to improve broadband access and affordability. The 
emphasis on supporting broadband projects, and funding positions for technical assistance aligns with 
the needs of the I/DD community, which often faces significant barriers to digital inclusion. 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of HB934 HD1.  
Sincerely, 
 
Daintry Bartoldus 
Executive Administrator 

1 
 
 
 
March 11, 2025 
 
Senate Committee on Economic Development & Tourism 
Senator Lynn DeCoite, Chair 
Senator Glenn Wakai, Vice Chair 
 
Tuesday March 11, 2025, 1:00 p.m.  
Conference Rm. 229 and via videoconference  
 
 
Dear Chair DeCoite , Vice Chair Wakai , and members of the committee: 
 
 
 
 
 
RE: HB 935 HD1 Relating to the Hawai‘i Broadband and Digital Equity Office 
 
 
 
My name is Kiran Polk, and I am the Executive Director & CEO of the Kapolei Chamber of Commerce. The 
Kapolei Chamber of Commerce is an advocate for businesses in the Kapolei region including Waipahu, 
Kapolei, ‘Ewa Beach, Nānakūli, Wai‘anae and Mākaha.  The Chamber works on behalf of its members and 
the business community to improve the regional and State economic climate and help West O‘ahu 
businesses thrive.  We are a member- driven, member-supported organization representing the interests 
of all types of business: small, medium or large, for profit or non-profit businesses or sole proprietorship. 
 
The Kapolei Chamber appreciates the intent behind HB 935 HD1, which proposes transferring the Hawai‘i 
Broadband and Digital Equity Office from the Department of Business, Economic Development, and 
Tourism (DBEDT) to the Office of Enterprise Technology Services under the Department of Accounting 
and General Services. Additionally, the bill establishes the Broadband and Digital Equity Special Fund. 
 
While we support the overall goal of this measure, we have concerns regarding the language added in 
HB 935 HD1, specifically in Section 27E, under the Broadband and Digital Equity Fund, item (b)(1), which 
states: 
 
“excluding the deployment of broadband infrastructure for the provision of retail service.” 
 
As written, this language could lead into unintended consequences in the future and further restrict 
funding opportunities such as those for critical, community-led broadband initiatives.  
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We respectfully request restoring the original wording to simply state: 
 
“Supporting broadband projects.” 
 
Since the core purpose and the intent of this measure is to transition the Hawai‘i Broadband and 
Digital Equity Office to a new department, the restrictive language introduced in HB 935 HD1 does not 
align with that intent.  
 
If there are specific concerns regarding the disbursement of funding from the newly established 
Broadband and Digital Equity Special Fund, those concerns should be addressed through the State’s 
procurement process but should not be included in this measure since it does not align with the intent.  
 
We respectfully urge you to support the removal of this restrictive clause to ensure that community-
driven broadband solutions can access the necessary funding to expand service to underserved and rural 
areas in the future.  
 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
 
 
Respectfully, 
 
Kiran Polk 
Executive Director & CEO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1001 Kamokila Boulevard, Campbell Building Suite 250, Kapolei, Hawaii 96707 

                                                                                                                                                       
86-260 Farrington Highway, Waianae, Hawaii  96792 - Telephone:  (808) 697-3457 - Fax: (808) 697-3687 
Visit our website at:  www.wcchc.com 
 
March 10, 2025 at XX:00 XM 
State Capitol, Conference Room 229 & Videoconference 
 
COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND TOURISM 
To:  
Chair Senator Lynn DeCoite 
            Vice Chair Glenn Wakai 
From: Rich P. Bettini, MPH 
President and CEO 
Waianae Coast Comprehensive Health Center (WCCHC) 
RE:  
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF HOUSE BILL 934 HD1 - RELATING TO THE HAWAII 
BROADBAND AND DIGITAL EQUITY OFFICE 
 
Aloha Chair DeCoite Vice Chair Wakai, and Members of the Senate Committee on Economic 
Development and Tourism, 
The Waianae Coast Comprehensive Health Center (WCCHC) supports, with amendments 
HB934 HD1, which intends to transition the Hawaii Broadband and Digital Equity Office to the 
Department of Technology and Innovation. However, we are concerned with the language 
added in HB934 HD1, specifically in Section 27E Broadband and Digital Equity Fund item 
b1, which reads: 
“Supporting broadband projects, excluding the deployment of broadband 
infrastructure for the provision of retail service;” 
We respectfully request the removal of the added language “excluding the deployment of 
broadband infrastructure for the provision of retail service;” to restore the bill’s original intent, 
specifically to state: 
• 
(1) Supporting broadband projects 
This change will make the bill more inclusive in supporting local community-led broadband 
solutions to drive innovation, clearly aligning with our state's digital equity goals. 
The Waianae Coast Comprehensive Health Center (WCCHC) is a Federally Qualified Health 
Center (FQHC) dedicated to improving the health and well-being of the West Oʻahu community 
through accessible and affordable medical and traditional healing services, including outreach to 
people experiencing homelessness—a crucial aspect of our community's well-being. With 52 
years of service, WCCHC is committed to providing comprehensive healthcare by addressing 
social determinants of health, including expanding access to broadband and digital resources 
that support education, economic opportunities, and healthcare access. 
The amendment raises questions about the necessity of imposing such restrictions, especially 
as it threatens to block funding for community-driven broadband solutions, such as affordable 
community wireless networks. The term “retail service” remains undefined, creating potential  

                                                                                                                                                       
86-260 Farrington Highway, Waianae, Hawaii  96792 - Telephone:  (808) 697-3457 - Fax: (808) 697-3687 
Visit our website at:  www.wcchc.com 
 
for unintended consequences, including the exclusion of small, innovative projects in 
marginalized communities, where these solutions are most needed. 
We appreciate Charter’s willingness to engage on this issue, and we remain open to continuing 
the dialogue on how we can collaborate to address the critical gaps in access for unsheltered 
populations and those living at or below the poverty level, which make up over 70% of 
WCCHC's patient population. However, it is clear that the current amendment does not align 
with the intent of HB934 HD1, which is to expand broadband access in a way that truly serves 
the needs of our local communities. 
It is also important to note that while funding for broadband infrastructure is already allocated 
through the BEAD program, it specifically excludes community wireless networks. The current 
language in HB934 HD1 would further limit funding for these essential community-driven 
solutions, which are critical for achieving digital equity and providing affordable broadband to 
marginalized communities. 
Additionally, the Hawaii Broadband and Digital Equity Office already has clear oversight 
authority for allocating these funds, as stipulated in the bill. Expenditures from the broadband 
and digital equity special fund are subject to oversight and prior approval by the Information 
Technology Steering Committee, ensuring that funding decisions are made with careful 
consideration and accountability. Given this existing framework, we question the need to impose 
upfront restrictions that could limit the state’s ability to allocate public funds in the best interests 
of our communities. 
Much like our concerns last year with HB2359, where we requested a veto due to similar 
language, the bill in its current form has a high potential to limit broadband deployment to the 
benefit of private interests over public interests, ultimately disadvantaging local communities.  
We recommend that the Committee on Economic Development and Tourism pass HB934 HD1 
with amendments, specifically removing the restrictive language “excluding the 
deployment of broadband infrastructure for the provision of retail service.” This change 
will restore the bill’s original intent and ensure that all individuals and communities, particularly 
those in socioeconomically disadvantaged areas, have access to the technology needed to fully 
participate in society, democracy, the economy, and, most importantly, health equity, including 
equitable access to telehealth and healthcare services. 
Mahalo nui loa, 
Rich P. Bettini, MPH 
President and CEO 
Waianae Coast Comprehensive Health Center (WCCHC) 
 

 
1177 Bishop Street, Suite 15, Honolulu, HI  96813  Hawai‘i antel.com 
 
 
 
 
Written Statement of  
Jeannine Souki 
Sr. Manager – Government & Regulatory Affairs  
  
 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT & TOURISM 
March 11, 2025, 1:00 PM  
State Capitol, Conference Room 229, Videoconference  
  
COMMENTS FOR:  
 H.B. 934, H.D. 1 – RELATING TO BROADBAND AND DIGITAL EQUITY OFFICE 
  
 
To: Chair DeCoite, Vice-Chair Waiki, and Members of the Committee  
 
Re: Testimony Providing Comments for HB 934, HD1 
 
Aloha Honorable Chair, Vice-Chair, and Committee Members:  
  
Thank you for this opportunity to provide comments on House Bill 934, HD1, to transfer  
the Hawai‘i  Broadband and Digital Equity Office (“HBDEO”) from the Department of  
Business, Economic Development, and Tourism (“DBEDT”) to the Office of Enterprise  
Technology Services (“ETS”) in the Department of Accounting and General Services (“DAGS”) 
establishes the Hawai‘i Broadband and Digital Equity Special Fund and appropriates additional funds. 
  
Hawaiian Telcom supports the intent of this bill, which consolidates broadband planning, coordination, 
and operations duties currently disbursed across multiple agencies under one umbrella to leverage 
resources and promote efficiency and efficacy.   
 
As the State and broadband service providers navigate the evolving landscape of broadband 
infrastructure and funding with the new federal administration, we must consider strategic approaches 
that maximize efficiency and align with federal initiatives. The Broadband Equity, Access, and 
Deployment (“BEAD”) Program, which allocates $42.45 billion to expand high-speed internet access, 
presents a unique opportunity for our state to enhance its broadband capabilities. The state's share of 
BEAD funding is $149.5M plus $46M in state matching funds to increase broadband infrastructure and 
promote digital literacy services.  Additionally, as a broadband service provider, Hawaiian Telcom 
continues to invest hundreds of millions of dollars annually to expand broadband infrastructure across 
the State to deliver high-speed internet services to rural and urban areas.  Hawaiian Telcom’s historic 
$1.7B investment aims to meet the rapidly evolving technology needs of families and businesses across 
the state, ensuring Hawai‘i remains at the forefront of broadband innovation and provides a once-in-a-
generation opportunity to ensure that access to broadband services is available to all households. 
 
In closing, Hawaiian Telcom supports the intent of this bill and the appropriation of general funds to 
match federal funds for broadband programs and services funded through BEAD programs.  We 
appreciate the opportunity to offer comments on HB 934, HD1.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Charter Communications  
Testimony of Rebecca Lieberman, Director of Government Affairs 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT & TOURISM 
Hawaii State Capitol 
Tuesday, March 11, 2025 
 
COMMENTS ON H.B. 934, H.D. 1 – RELATING TO THE HAWAII BROADBAND AND DIGITAL EQUITY 
OFFICE 
 
Chair DeCoite, Vice Chair Wakai, and Members of the Committee. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of  H.B. 934, H.D. 1, a bill that would transfer 
the Hawaii Broadband and Digital Equity Office to the Office of Enterprise Technology Services and 
establishes the Hawaii Broadband and Digital Equity Special Fund.  
As the largest broadband provider in the state, Charter supports efforts to promote digital 
equity and broadband access. A key aspect of reducing the digital divide is by investing in broadband 
infrastructure, digital navigators and literacy tools, affordability programs, and access to hardware.  
Charter believes that every Hawaii resident should have reliable access to the Internet. We will 
continue to help bring the benefits of broadband and access to the internet to those who need it most. 
Hawaii is slated to receive over $200 million in federal grants for broadband infrastructure in the 
immediate future (via the Broadband, Equity, Access, and Deployment Program), in addition to private 
investments already being made by the industry. The Broadband and Digital Equity Special Fund 
should prioritize funding projects related to broadband adoption and affordability programs, rather 
than retail infrastructure projects, which are separately supported by federal funding.  

 
2 
 
We are grateful to Chair Ilagan for incorporating our previously requested amendment into 
the bill. Charter spoke with the Broadband and Digital Equity Office, and we believe that this bill is in 
line with the state’s desire for the program, which is to support community anchor institutions, digital 
navigators and literacy tools, affordability programs, and access to hardware. Charter is not opposed 
to additional competition from new ISPs entering the market. However, the intent of the amendment 
was to ensure that new competition enters the market on a fair and equal playing field. Additionally, 
the BEAD Program dedicated hundreds of millions of dollars to ensure that all households in Hawaii 
will soon have high-speed broadband available. Infrastructure availability and digital equity are both 
important, but they are different problems requiring different, independent solutions.  
In 2023, Charter extended its network to reach an additional 9,000 homes and small businesses 
in Hawaii, investing $96 million across the state. Charter participated in the FCC’s Emergency 
Broadband Benefit Program (EBB) and Affordable Connectivity Program (ACP), which helped connect 
over 59,000 eligible households in Hawaii with high-speed broadband. Broadband internet access is 
more important than ever, and Charter offers a variety of affordable high-speed internet packages to 
meet all the connectivity and budget needs of our customers. With Spectrum Internet Assist, 
qualifying low-income families and seniors can receive high-speed internet for as little as  $15 per 
month.  
Mahalo for the opportunity to provide proposed amendments to H.B. 934, H.D. 1.  
 
 

Testimony of Sean Taketa McLaughlin​
​
​
​
​
​
 
Hawaii' Senate Committee on Economic Development & Tourism 
Tuesday March 11, 2025 at 1:00 pm 
 
Supporting HB934 - "Relating to the Hawaii Broadband Digital Equity Office" 
 
Thank you for this opportunity to share testimony supporting HB934 with amendments.  
 
Reorganizing State efforts to address our digital divide, you have the opportunity to make a 
timely difference.  Currently, critical planning and implementation functions are scattered across 
State departments, creating a lack of transparency and accountability to meet the State’s vision 
for Digital Equity.  
 
Local information needs for public health & safety, education, community based economic 
development, culture, arts, and civic engagement are not being met by the private corporations 
who profit immensely from our broadband communication networks.  Independent State action 
is needed to coordinate State investments of public resources with the State’s necessary 
regulation of the communication utilities we rely upon for broadband service.. 
 
Thoughtful reform of State digital equity efforts is overdue.  Lt. Governor’s testimony at the first 
two hearings on HB934 promised an inventory of State broadband functions that will be helpful 
and necessary to inform public policy going forward. 
 
Unfortunately, at the request of Charter Communications, HB934 was amended for 
anti-competitive purposes. Looking at the Committee review, Charter merely pointed out that 
"retail service" is being "separately supported by federal funding," as reason enough to restrict 
and hinder State investments to meet local needs.  In this case, undue deference was given to a 
special private interest at the expense of consumers and public interests.   
 
The language in HB934 HD1 that Charter proposed is undefined and potentially includes any 
service that is sold to a consumer.  It sounds like a duopolist's dream - use federal funding 
without local obligations to build essential networks, then restrict state funding to programmatic  
involvement to fund the network owners.  The anticompetitive benefit to incumbents, including 
the State's largest providers, is clear.  The effect is anti-consumer and inequity is the result. 
 
Why prohibit digital equity projects from building community networks or other public assets that 
provide "retail service?"  Who benefits by restricting State investments in digital equity?   
 
Please replace the CD1 language with the original language.  Thanks for your thoughtful 
consideration of this testimony and please feel free to contact me if you would like more 
information or perspective on this issue. 
 
Sean Taketa McLaughlin 
seantaketa@gmail.com, C: 808-595-4877 
 	

1961 Aamaka Pl. 
Pearl City, HI 96782 
808-462-8356, dancsmith@rocketmail.com 
 
March 10, 2025 
 
 
 
 
Committee on Economic Development and Tourism 
The Senate 
Capitol 
Honolulu, Hawaii 
 
Aloha Committee Members: 
 
I write in strong support of HB934 HD1 and the funding level you deem appropriate taking into 
account the requests of the Office of Enterprise Technology Services. 
 
However, I strongly recommend one amendment.  On page Page 6, Line 9, please restore the 
original bill’s language, specifically to say:  
    (1) Supporting broadband projects; 
 
The change in HD1, prohibiting the provision of retail service, was made at the request of Charter 
Communications.  Possible interpretations of Charter’s language could prevent even small, 
innovative projects, such as hybrid fiber-satellite – in remote, unserved or underserved 
communities.  Giant corporation Charter would not be significantly harmed by a modest group of 
homes not being available to them.  Ironically, the language could also prohibit a project that 
delivers customers to Charter. 
 
The change in this year’s bill does not rise to the level of the Charter-requested change to last year’s 
related, administration-requested HBDEO bill that we successfully encouraged the Governor to 
veto.  That is not an endorsement of the Charter change but a reflection that the good in HB934 
outweighs the bad.   
 
Please pass HB934 with the recommended restored language as described above. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Daniel C. Smith, PhD 
 
 

HB-934-HD-1 
Submitted on: 3/10/2025 10:04:31 AM 
Testimony for EDT on 3/11/2025 1:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Kaili Swan 
Individual 
Support 
Remotely Via 
Zoom 
 
 
Comments:  
I am in strong support of this measure beacuse people with disabilities need affordable 
broadband from them to access by using their personal electronic devices like cellphone tablets 
or e readers  
 

HB-934-HD-1 
Submitted on: 3/11/2025 8:03:30 AM 
Testimony for EDT on 3/11/2025 1:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Faith Tuipulotu 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha, 
I am in support of HB 934. 
Mahalo,  Faith Tuipulotu  
 
 	
