13.2. Committee on Finance: Special Responsibility. The Committee on Finance
shall:
(1) Have final responsibility over all programs and matters relating to the
State's financing policies, including taxation and other revenues, level
of expenditures, cash and debt management, and to the statewide
implementation of planning, programming, budgeting, and evaluation.
Subject to the provisions of these Rules, it shall consider the reports of
the fiscal officers of the State, all bills, petitions, and resolutions, those
portions of the state budget, and all other items pertaining to such
programs and matters. It shall also consider such other pertinent items
as may be referred to it by the House;
(2) Establish, within the revenue raising ability of the State, the general
level of total governmental expenditures for each fiscal year of a
biennial period and allocate to each standing committee a
proportionate part of such expenditures. Each standing committee
shall be responsible for budget review of the programs within its
jurisdiction and for making program expenditure recommendations to
the Committee on Finance. Upon receipt of the recommendations of
the other standing committees, the Committee on Finance shall review
the same to determine if, when taken as a whole, the programs and
amounts to be expended thereon are consistent with and within the
expenditure amounts it has allocated to the respective standing
committees. In making allocations to and in reviewing
recommendations, the Committee on Finance shall invite the
participation of the chair of the standing committee having primary
responsibility over the program. After review of all standing committee
recommendations, the Committee on Finance shall be responsible for
preparing the General and Supplemental Appropriations Bills for
consideration by the House; and
(3) In all other appropriation bills, inform the standing committee primarily
responsible for the program or matter under consideration, of the
amount and type of finances available. Upon receiving
recommendations for the expenditures from the appropriate standing
committee, the Committee on Finance shall review such
recommendations to determine if, when taken as a whole, the
recommendations are consistent with and within the expenditure
amounts allocated. In reviewing recommendations of the standing
committees, the Committee on Finance shall invite the participation of
the standing committee chair concerned.