UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I SYSTEM 
ʻŌNAEHANA KULANUI O HAWAIʻI   
Legislative Testimony 
Hōʻike Manaʻo I Mua O Ka ʻAhaʻōlelo 
_____________________________________________________________ 
Testimony Presented Before the  
Senate Committee on Health and Human Services 
Monday, March 10, 2025 at 1:00 p.m. 
By 
Bonnie Irwin, Chancellor 
and 
Rae Matsumoto, Dean 
Daniel K. Inouye College of Pharmacy 
University of Hawaiʻi at Hilo 
  
HB 72 HD2 – RELATING TO PHARMACY 
Chair San Buenaventura, Vice Chair Aquino, and Members of the Committee: 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony on HB 72 HD2. The University of 
Hawaiʻi at Hilo (UH Hilo) supports HB 72 HD2, which will require the registration of 
pharmacy technicians through the Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs. 
Pharmacy technicians are career professionals working under the supervision of a 
pharmacist, and have an essential role in the daily operation of pharmacies. 
 
Hawaiʻi is the only state that does not maintain a list of practicing pharmacy technicians. 
Legislation to address this oversight is important for supporting public health and safety 
by ensuring that these essential health care workers have the appropriate background 
and supervision, can receive timely communications and updates regarding relevant 
practice and regulation changes that impact their work, and facilitate access to training 
opportunities as the scope of practice of pharmacy technicians expands nationwide. 
 
We would like to emphasize that pharmacy technicians are professionals and represent 
a distinct category from pharmacy interns who are students in training to become future 
pharmacists. As career professionals in the health care workforce, pharmacy 
technicians perform functions under the supervision of pharmacists and may include 
roles such as dispensing medications, processing insurance claims, preparing sterile 
compounds such as intravenous (IV) solutions and chemotherapy, and with additional 
certifications, administering vaccines to patients. As career professionals in the health 
care workforce, the registration of pharmacy technicians is warranted and appropriate 
for the level of responsibility and trust afforded by the public. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of HB 72 HD2. 
 
 
e-
A¢$
2‘
D
0”‘
q“
4'
$41 Q KA ¢j\\\\>\
\'\'Y Op
/03
|su7
_A~2~
\,\“‘9
4‘4p°No

Testimony of the Board of Pharmacy 
 
Before the  
Senate Committee on Health and Human Services 
Monday, March 10, 2025 
1:00 p.m. 
Conference Room 225 and Videoconference 
 
On the following measure: 
H. B. 72, H.D. 2, RELATING TO PHARMACY 
 
Chair Yamashita and Members of the Committee: 
My name is James Skizewski, Executive Officer of the Board of Pharmacy 
(Board).  The Board voted unanimously to support this measure but requests 
amendments. 
 
The purpose of this bill beginning 1/1/2026 is to: (1) require pharmacy 
technicians to be registered; (2) impose a duty on pharmacists-in-charge to report 
violations conducted by registered pharmacy technicians; and (3) specify that 
supervising registered pharmacists are responsible for the actions of registered 
pharmacy technicians and pharmacy interns. 
 
The Board supports this measure’s intent to regulate pharmacy technicians.  The 
Board recently formed a permitted interaction group to look at the best methods to 
regulate pharmacy technicians for quality and general assurance.  The group noted the 
need to recognize national certifications provided by entities such as the Pharmacy 
Technician Certification Board, while still acknowledging the presence of local 
technicians who have received extensive on the job training.  
The Board agreed that a registration for all technicians may be a prudent initial 
step regarding the regulation of pharmacy technicians.  An expansion to the scope of 
practice to technicians that are nationally certified should also be recognized.  The 
expansion should include allowances such as those provided in Act 104 of the 2024 
legislative session.   
To align the measure with the Board’s current Hawaii Administrative Rules 
(HAR), the Board requests the term “direct” be removed from page 4, line 7, and page 
9, line 5.  The Board also requests the term “physically present” be removed from page 

 
Testimony of the Board of Pharmacy 
H.B. 72, H.D. 2 
Page 2 of 2 
 
4, line 10.  The Board’s HAR already sufficiently clarifies supervision requirements while 
allowing flexibility to address any potential changes in the practice. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this bill.  
 

 
 
 
 
First Hawaiian Center 
 
T 808-539-0400 
999 Bishop Street, Suite 1400 
F 808-533-4945 
Honolulu, HI 96813 
DATE: 
March 9, 2025 
 
TO: 
Senator Joy San Buenaventura 
Chair, Committee on Health and Human Services 
Senator Henry Aquino  
Vice Chair, Committee on Health and Human Services  
 
FROM: Tiffany Yajima 
 
RE: 
H.B. 72, H.D.2 - Relating to Pharmacy 
Hearing Date: Monday, March 10, 2025 at 1:00 p.m. 
Conference Room: 225 
 
 
Dear Chair San Buenaventura, Vice Chair Aquino, and Members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Services: 
Walgreens submits this testimony in support of H.B. 72, H.D.2, which requires 
pharmacy technicians to be registered with the state. Walgreen Co. (“Walgreens”) 
operates stores at more than 9,000 locations in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, 
and Puerto Rico.  In Hawaii, Walgreens has 13 stores on the islands of Oahu and Maui. 
Walgreens supports the amendments made in the H.D.1 and H.D.2 to adopt a definition 
of “auxiliary personnel” for personnel such as cashiers whose responsibilities are purely 
clerical in nature, to clarify the specific duties of a pharmacy technician, to clarify 
pharmacist supervision of a technician, to establish the specific functions of a pharmacy 
technician in statute, and to exempt this measure from the requirements of a sunrise 
analysis.  
Pharmacy technicians play an important role in the pharmacy setting by handling a 
range of tasks that allow pharmacists to focus on more complex responsibilities like 
patient consultations and clinical services. For example, pharmacy technicians can 
assist pharmacists with the preparation, dispensing, and managing of patient 
medications. Typically, pharmacy technician tasks include filling prescriptions, labeling 
and packaging medications, managing medication inventory, and performing 
administrative duties such as record-keeping and insurance processing. 
The 2024 Legislature passed Act 104 that allows, in part, pharmacists, pharmacy 
technicians and pharmacy interns the ability to administer immunizations and 
vaccinations to persons three years and older under the direct supervision of a 
pharmacist. This measure builds upon Act 104 to require that pharmacy technicians are 
registered by the state. This important measure will bring a regulatory framework to the 
critical role that pharmacy technicians fill, which Walgreens supports. For these reasons, 
we ask the committee to pass this bill.  
Thank you for the opportunity to submit this testimony. 
I SanHi
GOVERNMENT STRATEGIES
A umrsn LIABILITY LAW PARTNERSHIP

 
 
 
 
 
Testimony presented before the Senate Committee on Health and human Services 
March 10, 2025 
 
Dr. Corrie L. Sanders on behalf of  
The Hawai'i Pharmacists Association (HPhA) 
 
 
Honorable Chair San Buenaventura, Vice Chair Aquino, and members of the Committee,  
The Hawai'i Pharmacists Association (HPhA) strongly supports HB72 with minor amendments, 
which will require the registration of pharmacy technicians through the Department of 
Commerce and Consumer Affairs. Currently, Hawai'i is the only state in the nation without an 
active and managed registry of practicing pharmacy technicians. This lack of oversight presents 
challenges in ensuring consistent training, competency, and accountability within the pharmacy 
technician workforce. By mandating a registration process, HB72 enhances patient safety, 
improves workforce standards, and aligns Hawai'i with national best practices. 
Pharmacy technicians play an essential role in supporting pharmacists and ensuring the safe and 
efficient delivery of medications. Under the supervision of a pharmacist in the community 
setting, pharmacy technicians can fill and dispense medications, process insurance claims, and 
with additional training, administer vaccinations. In the hospital setting, we rely on pharmacy 
technicians to support the compounding of intravenous medications and to stock medication 
cabinets and other medication delivery systems. Pharmacy technicians often have full access to 
high risk and controlled medications.  
As the roles of pharmacy technicians expand across the country, including here in Hawai’i, it’s 
vital to ensure these essential workers meet a baseline level of competency to ensure patient 
safety and enhance patient care. Additionally, establishing a technician registry will create a vital 
data repository that enables clear communication of regulatory and practice updates, ensuring 
the workforce remains aligned with evolving state and federal requirements. 
HPhA believes that HB72 is a crucial step toward strengthening Hawai'i’s healthcare 
infrastructure. We feel strongly given the current roles and responsibilities of pharmacy 
technicians, to include vaccine administration starting January of 2025, that this bill be swiftly 
implemented to ensure pharmacy technicians can continue to serve patients with the highest 
level of professionalism and safety. 
We suggest the following minor amendments in alignment with those proposed by the Board of 
Pharmacy: 
 
• 
Removal of ‘continuing education requirements’ in Section 5, as specific requirements 
are not specified elsewhere within the bill. 
• 
Removal of the term “direct” be removed page 4, line 7, and page 9, line 5. 
• 
Removal of the term “physically present” from page 4, line 10.  
 

 
 
On behalf of The Hawai'i Pharmacists Association, mahalo for this opportunity to testify. 
Very Respectfully,  
 
 
 
Dr. Corrie L. Sanders, PharmD., BCACP, CPGx 
Executive Director, Hawai’i Pharmacists Association 

Date:  March 8, 2025 
 
To:  
The Honorable Joy A. San Buenaventura, Chair 
The Honorable Henry J.C. Aquino, Vice Chair 
Members of the Senate Committee on Health and Human Services 
 
Re:  
Support for HB72 HD2, Relating to Pharmacy 
 
Hrg:  Monday March 10, 2025 at 1:00 pm Conference Room 225 & Videoconference 
 
 
Aloha Senate Committee on Health and Human Services, 
 
As a licensed Hawai‘i pharmacist, retired Daniel K. Inouye College of Pharmacy faculty and 
member of the East Hawai‘i community, I am writing in strong support of HB72 HD2, 
beginning 1/1/2026, requires pharmacy technicians to be registered; imposes a duty on 
pharmacists-in-charge to report violations conducted by registered pharmacy technicians; 
and, specifies that supervising registered pharmacists are responsible for the actions of 
registered pharmacy technicians and pharmacy interns. 
Hawai‘i is the only state in the nation without an active, managed list of practicing 
pharmacy technicians, leaving a significant gap in oversight that can impact patient safety. 
HB72 HD2 aligns with national pharmacy technician regulation standards to strengthen 
pharmacy practice in Hawai‘i. 
 
HB72 HD2 serves as the backbone for consistent standards of training and competency 
across the profession. Creation of a pharmacy technician data repository is an essential 
step forward, providing a centralized resource for communicating practice and regulatory 
changes. 
 
Beyond enhancing patient safety, HB72 HD2 lays the foundation for pharmacy technicians 
in Hawai‘i to expand their scope of practice in the future. Across the country, registered 
pharmacy technicians are taking on advanced roles. Without regulation, Hawai‘i cannot 
adopt these changes and risks falling behind in providing the best possible care to our 
communities.  
 
HB72 HD2 represents a prudent investment in the safety, efficiency, and adaptability of 
our pharmacy workforce into the future. 
 
I strongly support HB72 HD2, respectfully ask you to pass it out of committee. 
  
Many thanks for your consideration, 
 
Forrest Batz, PharmD 
Keaau, HI 

HB-72-HD-2 
Submitted on: 3/8/2025 8:01:58 PM 
Testimony for HHS on 3/10/2025 1:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Lara Gomez 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
To the Honorable Chair San Buenaventura, Vice Chair Aquino and Members of the Committee 
on Health and Human Services 
As a pharmacist in Hawai‘i, I strongly support HB72, which seeks to establish critical 
regulations for pharmacy technicians in our state. Hawai‘i is the only state in the nation without 
an active, managed list of practicing pharmacy technicians, leaving a significant gap in oversight 
that can impact patient safety. Pharmacy technicians play an essential role in supporting 
pharmacists and ensuring the safe preparation and delivery of medications, and this initiative will 
serve as the backbone for consistent standards of training and competency across the profession. 
Additionally, the creation of a pharmacy technician data repository is 
an essential step forward, providing a centralized resource for communicating practice and 
regulatory changes. 
Beyond enhancing patient safety, HB72 will lay the foundation for pharmacy technicians in 
Hawai‘i to expand their scope of practice in the future. Across the country, pharmacy technicians 
are taking on advanced roles, such as administering immunizations and assisting with medication 
management. Without regulation, Hawai‘i cannot adapt to these changes and risks falling behind 
in providing the best possible care to our communities. This initiative comes at a reasonable cost 
and represents a prudent investment in ensuring the safety, efficiency, and adaptability of our 
pharmacy workforce. I urge the Committee to support HB72 and help Hawai‘i align with 
national pharmacy technician regulation standards to strengthen pharmacy practice in our state. 
  
Lara Gomez, PharmD 
 

HB-72-HD-2 
Submitted on: 3/8/2025 9:31:20 PM 
Testimony for HHS on 3/10/2025 1:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Ronald Taniguchi, 
Pharm.D., MBA 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I support HB72 HD2 as written.  Mahalo 
 

Honorable Chair San Buenaventura, Vice Chair Aquino, and Members of the Committee, 
My name is Dillon Solliday, and I am a final-year student in the Doctor of Pharmacy program at 
the University of Hawai’i at Hilo, Daniel K. Inouye College of Pharmacy. I write to express my 
support for HB72, which would require the registration of pharmacy technicians in Hawai’i. 
As a student pharmacist preparing to enter the profession, I have had firsthand experience 
working alongside pharmacy technicians in many community and hospital settings on O’ahu, 
Kaua’i, and Hawai’i Islands. Pharmacy technicians are an integral part of the healthcare 
workforce and are vital to ensuring the safe and efficient operation of pharmacies. Hawai’i is 
currently the only state in the country that does not require registration of pharmacy 
technicians, creating potential risks for medication errors. Adopting HB72 would reduce 
healthcare risks and align Hawai’i with national best practices. 
Beyond patient safety, implementing registration for pharmacy technicians would provide 
valuable data for workforce development. Without a formal registry, there is little visibility into 
the number of technicians working in the state, their training levels, or their distribution across 
the islands. This lack of information makes it difficult to assess workforce needs and implement 
policies to support pharmacy professionals effectively. By requiring registration, Hawai’i would 
gain critical insights that can help reduce future shortages of crucial healthcare workers, leading 
to better health outcomes for patients throughout the state. 
As a future pharmacist, I am committed to providing the highest standard of care to my 
patients. The registration of pharmacy technicians is a necessary measure to ensure that 
pharmacies across the state operate with safety and professionalism. I respectfully urge the 
committee to support HB72 for the benefit of patients, pharmacists, and the healthcare system 
as a whole. 
 
Sincerely, 
Dillon Solliday 
Doctor of Pharmacy Candidate 
University of Hawai’i at Hilo, Daniel K. Inouye College of Pharmacy 
 	

Testimony for HB72-HD1: A bill to mandate pharmacy technician registration within the DCCA 
Committee on Health and Human Services  
Sunday, March 9, 2025 
Testimony in SUPPORT of   HB72-HD2 
 
To the Honorable Chair San Buenaventura, Vice Chair Aquino, and Members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Services,  
As a pharmacist practicing in Hawai‘i, I strongly support HB72-HD2, which seeks to establish critical 
regulations for pharmacy technicians in our state. In my practice, pharmacy technicians are essential in 
performing the following tasks that are critical to the workflow of the pharmacy. Without quality 
technicians, the pharmacy cannot operate efficiently and effectively for the patients in the communities 
we serve.  
Hawai‘i is the only state in the nation without an active, managed list of practicing pharmacy technicians, 
leaving a significant gap in oversight that can impact patient safety. Meaning any unlicensed person can 
legally work in a pharmacy with no formal training. Few technicians have independently sought out 
national technician certifications, but there’s a vast amount that lack the skills necessary to assist and 
support the pharmacy workflow. Pharmacy technicians play an essential role in supporting pharmacists 
and ensuring the safe preparation and delivery of medications, and this initiative will serve as the 
backbone for consistent standards of training and competency across the profession. Additionally, the 
creation of a pharmacy technician data repository, is an essential step forward, providing a centralized 
resource for communicating practice and regulatory changes. 
Beyond enhancing patient safety, HB72-HD2 will lay the foundation for pharmacy technicians in Hawai‘i 
to expand their scope of practice in the future. Across the country, pharmacy technicians are taking on 
advanced roles, such as administering immunizations and assisting with medication management. 
Without regulation, Hawai‘i cannot adapt to these changes and risks falling behind in providing the best 
possible care to our communities. This initiative comes at a reasonable cost and represents a prudent 
investment in ensuring the safety, efficiency, and adaptability of our pharmacy workforce.  
I urge the Committee to support HB72-HD2 and help Hawai‘i align with national pharmacy technician 
regulation standards to strengthen pharmacy practice in our state. 
 
 
Sincerely,  
  
Faith Hicks, Pharm D.  
Pharmacy Practice Instructor, The Daniel K Inouye College of Pharmacy 
Relief Pharmacist, KTA Pharmacy 
 	
