UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I SYSTEM 
ʻŌNAEHANA KULANUI O HAWAIʻI   
Legislative Testimony 
Hōʻike Manaʻo I Mua O Ka ʻAhaʻōlelo 
_____________________________________________________________ 
Testimony Presented Before the  
House Committee on Consumer Protection & Commerce 
Thursday, February 6, 2025 at 2:00 p.m. 
By 
Bonnie Irwin, Chancellor 
and 
Rae Matsumoto, Dean 
Daniel K. Inouye College of Pharmacy 
University of Hawaiʻi at Hilo 
  
HB 72 HD1 – RELATING TO PHARMACY 
Chair Matayoshi, Vice Chair Chun, and Members of the Committee: 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony on HB 72 HD1. The University of 
Hawaiʻi at Hilo (UH Hilo) supports HB 72 HD1, which will require the registration of 
pharmacy technicians through the Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs. 
Pharmacy technicians are career professionals working under the supervision of a 
pharmacist, and have an essential role in the daily operation of pharmacies. 
 
Hawaiʻi is the only state that does not maintain a list of practicing pharmacy technicians. 
Legislation to address this oversight is important for supporting public health and safety 
by ensuring that these essential health care workers have the appropriate background 
and supervision, can receive timely communications and updates regarding relevant 
practice and regulation changes that impact their work, and facilitate access to training 
opportunities as the scope of practice of pharmacy technicians expands nationwide. 
 
We would like to emphasize that pharmacy technicians are professionals and represent 
a distinct category from pharmacy interns who are students in training to become future 
pharmacists. As career professionals in the health care workforce, pharmacy 
technicians perform functions under the supervision of pharmacists and may include 
roles such as dispensing medications, processing insurance claims, preparing sterile 
compounds such as intravenous (IV) solutions and chemotherapy, and with additional 
certifications, administering vaccines to patients. As career professionals in the health 
care workforce, the registration of pharmacy technicians is warranted and appropriate 
for the level of responsibility and trust afforded by the public. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of HB 72 HD1. 
 
 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 
 	

Testimony of the Board of Pharmacy 
 
Before the  
House Committee on Consumer Protection and Commerce 
Thursday, February 6, 2025 
2:00 p.m. 
Conference Room 329 and Videoconference 
 
On the following measure: 
H. B. 72, H.D. 1, RELATING TO PHARMACY 
 
Chair Matayoshi and Members of the Committee: 
My name is Christopher Fernandez and I am the Executive Officer of the Board 
of Pharmacy (Board).  The Board will meet on February 20, 2025 and take a position on 
this measure. 
 
The purposes of this bill are to: (1) require pharmacy technicians to be 
registered; (2) impose a duty on pharmacists-in-charge to report violations conducted by 
registered pharmacy technicians; and (3) specify that supervising registered 
pharmacists are responsible for the actions of registered pharmacy technicians and 
pharmacy interns. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this bill.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
Testimony presented before the House Committee on Consumer Protection 
February 6, 2025  
 
Dr. Corrie L. Sanders on behalf of  
The Hawai'i Pharmacists Association (HPhA) 
 
 
Honorable Chair Matayoshi, Vice Chair Chun, and Members of the Committee,  
The Hawai'i Pharmacists Association (HPhA) strongly supports HB72, which will require the 
registration of pharmacy technicians through the Department of Commerce and Consumer 
Affairs. Currently, Hawai'i is the only state in the nation without an active and managed 
registry of practicing pharmacy technicians. This lack of oversight presents challenges in 
ensuring consistent training, competency, and accountability within the pharmacy technician 
workforce. By mandating a registration process, HB72 enhances patient safety, improves 
workforce standards, and aligns Hawai'i with national best practices. 
Pharmacy technicians play an essential role in supporting pharmacists and ensuring the safe and 
efficient delivery of medications. Under the supervision of a pharmacist in the community 
setting, pharmacy technicians can fill and dispense medications, process insurance claims, and 
with additional training, administer vaccinations. In the hospital setting, we rely on pharmacy 
technicians to support the compounding of intravenous medications and to stock medication 
cabinets and other medication delivery systems. Pharmacy technicians often have full access to 
high risk and controlled medications.  
As the roles of pharmacy technicians expand across the country, including here in Hawai’i, it’s 
vital to ensure these essential workers meet a baseline level of competency to ensure patient 
safety and enhance patient care. Additionally, establishing a technician registry will create a vital 
data repository that enables clear communication of regulatory and practice updates, ensuring 
the workforce remains aligned with evolving state and federal requirements. 
HPhA believes that HB72 is a crucial step toward strengthening Hawai'i’s healthcare 
infrastructure. We feel strongly given the current roles and responsibilities of pharmacy 
technicians, to include vaccine administration starting January of 2025, that this bill be swiftly 
implemented to ensure pharmacy technicians can continue to serve patients with the highest 
level of professionalism and safety. 
We suggest the following minor amendment: 
-Removal of ‘continuing education requirements’ in Section 5 as requirements are not specified 
elsewhere within the bill. 
On behalf of The Hawai'i Pharmacists Association, mahalo for this opportunity to testify. 
Very Respectfully,  
 
Corrie L. Sanders, PharmD., BCACP, CPGx 
Executive Director, Hawai’i Pharmacists Association 

 
 
 
 
First Hawaiian Center 
 
T 808-539-0400 
999 Bishop Street, Suite 1400 
F 808-533-4945 
Honolulu, HI 96813 
DATE: 
February 5, 2025 
 
TO: 
Representative Scot Matayoshi 
Chair, House Committee on Consumer Protection and Commerce 
Representative Cory Chun 
Vice Chair, House Committee on Consumer Protection and Commerce 
 
FROM: Tiffany Yajima 
 
RE: 
H.B. 72, H.D.1 - Relating to Pharmacy 
Hearing Date: Thursday, February 6, 2025 at 2:00 p.m. 
Conference Room: 329 
 
 
Dear Chair Matayoshi, Vice Chair Chun, and Members of the Committee on 
Consumer Protection and Commerce: 
Walgreens submits this testimony in support of H.B. 72, H.D.1, which requires 
pharmacy technicians to be registered with the state. Walgreen Co. (“Walgreens”) 
operates stores at more than 9,000 locations in all 50 states, the District of 
Columbia, and Puerto Rico.  In Hawaii, Walgreens has 13 stores on the islands of 
Oahu and Maui. 
Walgreens supports the amendments made in the H.D.1 to 1) adopt a definition of 
“auxiliary personnel” for personnel such as cashiers whose responsibilities are 
purely clerical in nature; 2) clarify the specific duties of a pharmacy technician; 3) 
clarify pharmacist supervision of a technician; and 4) establish the specific functions 
of a pharmacy technician by statute versus by administrative rule. 
Pharmacy technicians play an important role in the pharmacy setting by handling a 
range of tasks that allow pharmacists to focus on more complex responsibilities like 
patient consultations and clinical services. For example, pharmacy technicians can 
assist pharmacists with the preparation, dispensing, and managing of patient 
medications. Typically, pharmacy technician tasks include filling prescriptions, 
labeling and packaging medications, managing medication inventory, and performing 
administrative duties such as record-keeping and insurance processing. 
The 2024 Legislature passed Act 104 that allows, in part, pharmacists, pharmacy 
technicians and pharmacy interns the ability to administer immunizations and 
vaccinations to persons three years and older under the direct supervision of a 
pharmacist. This measure builds upon Act 104 to require that pharmacy technicians 
are registered by the state. This important measure will bring a regulatory framework 
to the critical role that pharmacy technicians fill, which Walgreens supports.  
Thank you for the opportunity to submit this testimony.  

 
 
 
 
Testimony for HB72: A bill to mandate pharmacy technician registration within the DCCA 
House Committee on Health 
Thursday, February 6, 2025 
Testimony in SUPPORT of HB72 
To the Honorable Chair Matayoshi, Vice Chair Chun, and Members of the Committee,  
My name is Megan Arbles Pharm D., Director of Pharmacy for an independent pharmacy on the Big Island and I 
appreciate the opportunity to submit testimony in support of Senate Bill No. HB72, A Bill to Mandate Pharmacy 
Technician Registration within the DCCA. 
As a pharmacist practicing in Hawai‘i, I strongly support HB72, which seeks to establish critical regulations for pharmacy 
technicians in our state. In my practice, pharmacy technicians are essential in performing the following tasks that are 
critical to the workflow of the pharmacy including processing prescriptions, managing inventory, preparing medications 
assisting with insurance claims, and providing essential support to pharmacists in ensuring patient safety.  By handling 
these key responsibilities pharmacy technicians help streamline operations, allowing pharmacists to focus on clinical 
services such as medication counseling, immunizations, and chronic disease management. 
Hawai‘i is the only state in the nation without an active, managed list of practicing pharmacy technicians, leaving a 
significant gap in oversight that can impact patient safety.  Establishing regulations for pharmacy technicians through 
HB72 will ensure proper training, standardization, and accountability ultimately improving patient care and pharmacy 
efficiency in Hawai’i.  Additionally, the creation of a pharmacy technician data repository is an essential step forward, 
providing a centralized resource for communicating practice and regulatory changes. 
Beyond enhancing patient safety, HB72 will lay the foundation for pharmacy technicians in Hawai‘i to expand their 
scope of practice in the future. Across the country, pharmacy technicians are taking on advanced roles, such as 
administering immunizations and assisting with medication management. Without regulation, Hawai‘i cannot adapt to 
these changes and risks falling behind in providing the best possible care to our communities. This initiative comes at a 
reasonable cost and represents a prudent investment in ensuring the safety, efficiency, and adaptability of our 
pharmacy workforce.  
I urge the Committee to support HB72 and help Hawai‘i align with national pharmacy technician regulation standards 
to strengthen pharmacy practice in our state. 
Sincerely,  
 
Megan Arbles, Pharm D. 
Director of Pharmacy Operations, KTA Pharmacy 
50 E. Puainako St Hilo, HI 96720  
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 
 	

 
 
January 30, 2025 
 
Testimony in SUPPORT for HB72: RELATING TO PHARMACY 
 
Dear Chair Matayoshi, Vice Chair Chun, and Members of the Committee on Consumer Protection: 
 
As a rural healthcare provider, access to comprehensive, high-quality healthcare services is our mission at 
Moloka’i Drugs. On behalf of our employees and patients, I am testifying in favor of HB72, which will create 
necessary regulations for pharmacy technicians in our state.  
 
At Moloka’i Drugs, now celebrating 90 years of service, our pharmacy technicians are essential in workflow 
management – from data entry, to helping confirm inventory management, to contacting providers on-island 
and off-island, to product dispensing, to giving the prescription to the verifying pharmacist, to returning the 
final medicine to the patient at point-of-sale 
 
Hawai‘i is the only state in the United States without an active, managed list of practicing pharmacy 
technicians. Beyond enhancing our Moloka’i patients’ safety, this measure will lay the foundation for 
pharmacy technicians in Hawai‘i to expand their scope of practice in the future. Across the country, 
pharmacy technicians are taking on advanced roles, such as administering immunizations and assisting 
with medication management. Right now, our pharmacy technicians administer over 50 percent of our 
immunizations. 
 
Without regulation, Hawai‘i risks falling behind in providing the best possible care to our communities, 
especially rural communities like Moloka’i with limited medical resources. Many of our people, especially 
our kupuna, have challenges getting on-island healthcare. With only one airline and no ferry providing 
transportation, our people have even more challenges getting to O’ahu, Maui, and the mainland for medical 
services and procedures. 
 
HB72 comes at a very reasonable pricetag, and even small pharmacies such as Moloka’i Drugs are willing 
to pay for these regulations. On behalf of our 7,000 full-time residents, we ask that you support HB72 and 
help Hawai’i become the 50th state of fifty to finally align our pharmacy technicians with national standards. 
Our Moloka’i-based pharmacy technicians live full-time on our island and know our people. They work 
hand-in-hand with our licensed pharmacists. Our pharmacy technicians are essential healthcare employees 
and they help keep “Moloka’iians” healthy and thriving. Thank you. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Kimberly Mikami Svetin /s/ 
 
Kimberly Mikami Svetin 
President 
Moloka’i Drugs, Inc. 
P.O. Box 558 
Kaunakakai, HI 96748 
Work 808-553-5790 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 
 	

Testimony for HB72: A bill to mandate pharmacy technician registration within the DCCA 
House Committee on Health 
February 4, 2025 
Testimony in SUPPORT of HB72 
 
To the Honorable Chair Takayama Vice Chair Keohokapu-Lee Loy, and Members of the Committee,  
As a pharmacist practicing in Hawai‘i, I strongly support HB72, which seeks to establish critical 
regulations for pharmacy technicians in our state. Pharmacy technicians are essential in performing the 
following tasks that are critical to the workflow of the pharmacy  
Hawai‘i is the ONLY state in the nation without an active, managed list of practicing pharmacy 
technicians, leaving a significant gap in oversight that can impact patient safety. Pharmacy technicians 
play an essential role in supporting pharmacists and ensuring the safe preparation and delivery of 
medications, and this initiative will serve as the backbone for consistent standards of training and 
competency across the profession. Additionally, the creation of a pharmacy technician data repository is 
an essential step forward, providing a centralized resource for communicating practice and regulatory 
changes. 
Beyond enhancing patient safety, HB72 will lay the foundation for pharmacy technicians in Hawai‘i to 
expand their scope of practice in the future. Across the country, pharmacy technicians are taking on 
advanced roles, such as administering immunizations and assisting with medication management. 
Without regulation, Hawai‘i cannot adapt to these changes and risks falling behind in providing the best 
possible care to our communities. This initiative comes at a reasonable cost and represents a prudent 
investment in ensuring the safety, efficiency, and adaptability of our pharmacy workforce.  
I urge the Committee to support HB72 and help Hawai‘i align with national pharmacy technician 
regulation standards to strengthen pharmacy practice in our state. 
 
 
Lara Gomez, PharmD 

HB-72-HD-1 
Submitted on: 2/4/2025 5:01:52 PM 
Testimony for CPC on 2/6/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Nicole young 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Testimony for HB72: A bill to mandate pharmacy technician registration within the DCCA 
House Committee on Consumer Protection and Commerce 
Thursday, February 6, 2025 
Testimony in SUPPORT of HB72 
  
To the Honorable Chair Scot Matayoshi, Vice Chair Cory Chun, and Members of the 
Committee, 
As a pharmacist practicing in Hawai‘i, I strongly support HB72, which seeks to establish critical 
regulations for pharmacy technicians in our state. In my practice, pharmacy technicians are 
essential in performing the tasks that are critical to the workflow of the pharmacy, such as 
compound medications. 
Hawai‘i is the only state in the nation without an active, managed list of practicing pharmacy 
technicians, leaving a significant gap in oversight that can impact patient safety. Pharmacy 
technicians play an essential role in supporting pharmacists and ensuring the safe preparation and 
delivery of medications, and this initiative will serve as the backbone for consistent standards of 
training and competency across the profession. Additionally, the creation of a pharmacy 
technician data repository is an essential step forward, providing a centralized resource for 
communicating practice and regulatory changes. 
Beyond enhancing patient safety, HB72 will lay the foundation for pharmacy technicians in 
Hawai‘i to expand their scope of practice in the future. Across the country, pharmacy technicians 
are taking on advanced roles, such as administering immunizations and assisting with medication 
management. Without regulation, Hawai‘i cannot adapt to these changes and risks falling behind 
in providing the best possible care to our communities. This initiative comes at a reasonable cost 
and represents a prudent investment in ensuring the safety, efficiency, and adaptability of our 
pharmacy workforce. 

I urge the Committee to support HB72 and help Hawai‘i align with national pharmacy technician 
regulation standards to strengthen pharmacy practice in our state. 
  
Sincerely, 
Nicole Young, PharmD 
Associate Professor of Pharmacy Practice and Critical Care Pharmacist 
 

HB-72-HD-1 
Submitted on: 2/4/2025 5:10:54 PM 
Testimony for CPC on 2/6/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Ronald Taniguchi, 
Pharm.D., MBA 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I am in full support of HB72 HD1.  Mahalo 
 

Testimony for HB72-HD1: A bill to mandate pharmacy technician registration within the DCCA 
House Committee on Health 
Wednesday Feb 4, 2025 
Testimony in SUPPORT of HB72-HD1 
 
To the Honorable Chair Matayoshi, Vice Chair Chun and Members of the Committee on 
Consumer Protection & Commerce,  
As a health economist in Hawai‘i, I strongly support HB72-HD1, which seeks to establish critical 
regulations for pharmacy technicians in our state. Pharmacy technicians are essential in performing 
tasks that are critical to the workflow of the pharmacy. 
Hawai‘i is the only state in the nation without an active, managed list of practicing pharmacy 
technicians, leaving a significant gap in oversight that can impact patient safety. Pharmacy technicians 
play an essential role in supporting pharmacists and ensuring the safe preparation and delivery of 
medications, and this initiative will serve as the backbone for consistent standards of training and 
competency across the profession. Additionally, the creation of a pharmacy technician data repository is 
an essential step forward, providing a centralized resource for communicating practice and regulatory 
changes. 
Beyond enhancing patient safety, HB72-HD1 will lay the foundation for pharmacy technicians in Hawai‘i 
to expand their scope of practice in the future. Across the country, pharmacy technicians are taking on 
advanced roles, such as administering immunizations and assisting with medication management. 
Without regulation, Hawai‘i cannot adapt to these changes and risks falling behind in providing the best 
possible care to our communities. This initiative comes at a reasonable cost and represents a prudent 
investment in ensuring the safety, efficiency, and adaptability of our pharmacy workforce.  
I urge the Committee to support HB72-HD1 and help Hawai‘i align with national pharmacy technician 
regulation standards to strengthen pharmacy practice in our state. 
Sincerely, 
 
Deborah A. Taira, ScD 
Health Economist 
 

Date:  February 5, 2025 
 
To:  
The Honorable Scot Z. Matayoshi, Chair 
The Honorable Cory M. Chun, Vice Chair 
Members of the House Committee on Consumer Protection & Commerce 
 
Re:  
Support for HB72 HD1, Relating to Pharmacy 
 
Hrg:  Thursday February 6, 2025 at 2:00 pm via Videoconference Conference Room 329 
 
Aloha House Committee on Consumer Protection & Commerce. 
 
As a licensed Hawai‘i pharmacist and retired Daniel K. Inouye College of Pharmacy faculty, I 
am writing in strong support of HB72 HD1, which beginning 1/1/2026, requires 
pharmacy technicians to be registered; imposes a duty on pharmacists-in-charge to report 
violations conducted by registered pharmacy technicians; specifies that supervising 
registered pharmacists are responsible for the actions of registered pharmacy technicians 
and pharmacy interns. 
 
Pharmacy technicians play an essential role in supporting pharmacists and ensuring the 
safe preparation and delivery of medications across our state.  
 
Hawai‘i is the only state in the nation without an active, managed list of practicing 
pharmacy technicians, leaving a significant gap in oversight that can impact patient safety. 
HB72 HD1 aligns with national pharmacy technician regulation standards to strengthen 
pharmacy practice in Hawai‘i. 
 
HB72 serves as the backbone for consistent standards of training and competency across 
the profession. Creation of a pharmacy technician data repository is an essential step 
forward, providing a centralized resource for communicating practice and regulatory 
changes. 
 
Beyond enhancing patient safety, HB72 HD1 lays the foundation for pharmacy technicians 
in Hawai‘i to expand their scope of practice in the future. Across the country, registered 
pharmacy technicians are taking on advanced roles. Without regulation, Hawai‘i cannot 
adopt these changes and risks falling behind in providing the best possible care to our 
communities.  
 
HB72 HD1 represents a prudent investment in the safety, efficiency, and adaptability of 
our pharmacy workforce into the future. 
 
I strongly support HB72 HD1, respectfully ask you to pass it out of committee. 
  
Many thanks for your consideration, 
 
Forrest Batz, PharmD 
Keaau, HI 

Testimony for HB72-HD1: A bill to mandate pharmacy technician registration within the DCCA 
House Committee on Consumer Protection & Commerce 
Thursday, February 6, 2025 
Testimony in SUPPORT of HB72-HD1 
 
To the Honorable Chair Matayoshi, Vice Chair Chun, and Members of the Committee on Consumer 
Protection & Commerce,  
As a pharmacist practicing in Hawai‘i, I strongly support HB72-HD1, which seeks to establish critical 
regulations for pharmacy technicians in our state. In my practice, pharmacy technicians are essential in 
performing the following tasks that are critical to the workflow of the pharmacy. Without quality 
technicians, the pharmacy cannot operate efficiently and effectively for the patients in the communities 
we serve.  
Hawai‘i is the only state in the nation without an active, managed list of practicing pharmacy technicians, 
leaving a significant gap in oversight that can impact patient safety. Meaning any unlicensed person can 
legally work in a pharmacy with no formal training. Few technicians have independently sought out 
national technician certifications, but there’s a vast amount that lack the skills necessary to assist and 
support the pharmacy workflow. Pharmacy technicians play an essential role in supporting pharmacists 
and ensuring the safe preparation and delivery of medications, and this initiative will serve as the 
backbone for consistent standards of training and competency across the profession. Additionally, the 
creation of a pharmacy technician data repository, is an essential step forward, providing a centralized 
resource for communicating practice and regulatory changes. 
Beyond enhancing patient safety, HB72-HD1 will lay the foundation for pharmacy technicians in Hawai‘i 
to expand their scope of practice in the future. Across the country, pharmacy technicians are taking on 
advanced roles, such as administering immunizations and assisting with medication management. 
Without regulation, Hawai‘i cannot adapt to these changes and risks falling behind in providing the best 
possible care to our communities. This initiative comes at a reasonable cost and represents a prudent 
investment in ensuring the safety, efficiency, and adaptability of our pharmacy workforce.  
I urge the Committee to support HB72-HD1 and help Hawai‘i align with national pharmacy technician 
regulation standards to strengthen pharmacy practice in our state. 
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Faith Hicks, Pharm D.  
Relief Pharmacist, KTA Pharmacy 

HB-72-HD-1 
Submitted on: 2/5/2025 1:15:27 PM 
Testimony for CPC on 2/6/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Beverly Zilonis 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha,  
My name is Beverly Zilonis CPhT-Adv and I fully support HB 72. I have been a pharmacy 
technician with an advanced pharmacy technician certification since 2006. I started my career in 
the Bay area of Northern California and moved to Hawaiʻi in 2011. In the state of California, 
pharmacy technicians are required to either go to school or take the national exam (PTCB) to get 
licensed in that state including doing a background check that includes fingerprinting. I have had 
the privilege of working in a pharmacy technician registered state and a non-pharmacy 
technician registered State and have seen very clear differences. For almost 14 years I worked for 
Walgreens. I started working for them in California and transferred to their new branch on the 
Big Island of Hawaiʻi. After I transferred, my experience as a senior technician for them changed 
drastically. I was tasked with training the technician staff for the store. Unfortunately, there is no 
requirement for pharmacy technicians in the State of Hawaiʻi. My new technicians had no 
pharmacy background and no prior knowledge of pharmaceuticals. Training in a retail setting is 
already difficult and demanding due to hours and workload, but it was overwhelming to train 
someone that I not only had to teach how to do this job, I had to teach them what a pharmacy 
technician is supposed to know and the sense of responsibility that you should have towards 
patient safety. Many technicians unfortunately here didn't understand the lack of job 
opportunities and the professional recognition from fellow staff. Most people in the public do not 
realize how much the pharmacy technicians contribute to patient safety and pharmacy 
compliance. Pharmacists are there to double check us and ensure patient safety, but pharmacy 
technicians are the first line. Pharmacy technicians need to have the tools to make the best 
judgment when they are taking in prescriptions. Pharmacists have a heavy workload. Some 
pharmacies are just one pharmacist on duty and that pharmacist needs to be able to count on their 
technicians. In addition to this legislature HB 72  there is another piece of legislation being 
proposed, SB 324 which mandates reimbursement for services provided by participating 
registered pharmacists practicing within their scope of practice by private and public health 
plans. Having a registry for pharmacy technicians will help ensure not only patient safety but that 
the pharmacists feel supported in knowing they have knowledgeable staff.  
Best Regards, 
Beverly Zilonis CPhT-Adv 
mana8311@gmail.com 
 
