UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I SYSTEM 
ʻŌNAEHANA KULANUI O HAWAIʻI   
Legislative Testimony 
Hōʻike Manaʻo I Mua O Ka ʻAhaʻōlelo 
_____________________________________________________________ 
Testimony Presented Before the  
House Committee on Health 
Friday, January 31, 2025 at 9:15 am 
By 
Bonnie Irwin, Chancellor 
and 
Rae Matsumoto, Dean 
Daniel K. Inouye College of Pharmacy 
University of Hawaiʻi at Hilo 
  
HB 72 – RELATING TO PHARMACY 
Chair Takayama, Vice Chair Keohokapu-Lee Loy and Members of the Committee: 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony on HB 72. The University of 
Hawaiʻi at Hilo (UH Hilo) supports HB 72, which will require the registration of pharmacy 
technicians through the Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs. Pharmacy 
technicians are career professionals working under the supervision of a pharmacist, and 
have an essential role in the daily operation of pharmacies. 
 
Hawaiʻi is the only state that does not maintain a list of practicing pharmacy technicians. 
Legislation to address this oversight is important for supporting public health and safety 
by ensuring that these essential health care workers have the appropriate background 
and supervision, can receive timely communications and updates regarding relevant 
practice and regulation changes that impact their work, and facilitate access to training 
opportunities as the scope of practice of pharmacy technicians expands nationwide. 
 
We would like to clarify that pharmacy technicians are professionals and represent a 
distinct category from pharmacy interns who are students in training to become future 
pharmacists. As career professionals in the health care workforce, pharmacy 
technicians perform functions under the supervision of pharmacists and may include 
roles such as dispensing medications, processing insurance claims, and with additional 
certifications, administering vaccines to patients. As career professionals in the health 
care workforce, the registration of pharmacy technicians is warranted and appropriate 
for the level of responsibility and trust afforded by the public. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of HB 72. 
 

 
 
 
 
Testimony for HB72: A bill to mandate pharmacy technician registration within the DCCA 
House Committee on Health 
Friday, January 31, 2025 
Testimony in SUPPORT of HB72 
To the Honorable Chair Takayama Vice Chair Keohokapu-Lee Loy, and Members of the Committee,  
My name is Megan Arbles Pharm D., Director of Pharmacy for an independent pharmacy on the Big Island and I 
appreciate the opportunity to submit testimony in support of Senate Bill No. HB72, A Bill to Mandate Pharmacy 
Technician Registration within the DCCA. 
As a pharmacist practicing in Hawai‘i, I strongly support HB72, which seeks to establish critical regulations for pharmacy 
technicians in our state. In my practice, pharmacy technicians are essential in performing the following tasks that are 
critical to the workflow of the pharmacy including processing prescriptions, managing inventory, preparing medications 
assisting with insurance claims, and providing essential support to pharmacists in ensuring patient safety.  By handling 
these key responsibilities pharmacy technicians help streamline operations, allowing pharmacists to focus on clinical 
services such as medication counseling, immunizations, and chronic disease management. 
Hawai‘i is the only state in the nation without an active, managed list of practicing pharmacy technicians, leaving a 
significant gap in oversight that can impact patient safety.  Establishing regulations for pharmacy technicians through 
HB72 will ensure proper training, standardization, and accountability ultimately improving patient care and pharmacy 
efficiency in Hawai’i.  Additionally, the creation of a pharmacy technician data repository is an essential step forward, 
providing a centralized resource for communicating practice and regulatory changes. 
Beyond enhancing patient safety, HB72 will lay the foundation for pharmacy technicians in Hawai‘i to expand their 
scope of practice in the future. Across the country, pharmacy technicians are taking on advanced roles, such as 
administering immunizations and assisting with medication management. Without regulation, Hawai‘i cannot adapt to 
these changes and risks falling behind in providing the best possible care to our communities. This initiative comes at a 
reasonable cost and represents a prudent investment in ensuring the safety, efficiency, and adaptability of our 
pharmacy workforce.  
I urge the Committee to support HB72 and help Hawai‘i align with national pharmacy technician regulation standards 
to strengthen pharmacy practice in our state. 
Sincerely,  
 
Megan Arbles, Pharm D. 
Director of Pharmacy Operations, KTA Pharmacy 
50 E. Puainako St Hilo, HI 96720  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony presented before the House Committee on Health 
January 31, 2025  
 
Dr. Corrie L. Sanders on behalf of  
The Hawai'i Pharmacists Association (HPhA) 
 
 
Honorable Chair Takayama, Vice Chair Keohokapu-Lee Loy, and Members of the Committee,  
The Hawai'i Pharmacists Association (HPhA) strongly supports HB72, which will require the 
registration of pharmacy technicians through the Department of Commerce and Consumer 
Affairs. Currently, Hawai'i is the only state in the nation without an active and managed 
registry of practicing pharmacy technicians. This lack of oversight presents challenges in 
ensuring consistent training, competency, and accountability within the pharmacy technician 
workforce. By mandating a registration process, HB72 enhances patient safety, improves 
workforce standards, and aligns Hawai'i with national best practices. 
Pharmacy technicians play an essential role in supporting pharmacists and ensuring the safe 
and efficient delivery of medications. Under the supervision of a pharmacist in the community 
setting, pharmacy technicians can fill and dispense medications, process insurance claims, and 
with additional training, administer vaccinations. In the hospital setting, we rely on pharmacy 
technicians to support the compounding of intravenous medications and to stock medication 
cabinets and other medication delivery systems.  
As the roles of pharmacy technicians expand across the country, including here in Hawai’i, 
it’s vital to ensure these essential workers meet a baseline level of competency to ensure 
patient safety and enhance patient care. Additionally, establishing a technician registry will 
create a vital data repository that enables clear communication of regulatory and practice 
updates, ensuring the workforce remains aligned with evolving state and federal requirements. 
HPhA believes that HB72 is a crucial step toward strengthening Hawai'i’s pharmacy 
infrastructure and ensuring that pharmacy technicians can continue to serve patients with the 
highest level of professionalism and safety. We suggest the following minor amendments: 
- 
Deletion of the duplicative “registered pharmacy technician” in Section 2 
- 
Creation of three new definitions to designate between registered pharmacy 
technicians, pharmacy interns, and auxiliary personnel in Section 2 
- 
Removal of ‘continuing education requirements’ in Section 5 as requirements are not 
specified elsewhere within the bill  
On behalf of The Hawai'i Pharmacists Association, mahalo for this opportunity to testify. 
Very Respectfully,  
 
Corrie L. Sanders, PharmD., BCACP, CPGx 
Executive Director, Hawai’i Pharmacists Association 

 
 
 
 
First Hawaiian Center 
 
T 808-539-0400 
999 Bishop Street, Suite 1400 
F 808-533-4945 
Honolulu, HI 96813 
 
DATE: 
January 30, 2025 
 
TO: 
Representative Gregg Takayama 
Chair, House Committee on Health 
Representative Susan Keohokapu-Lee Loy 
Vice Chair, House Committee on Health 
 
FROM: Tiffany Yajima 
 
RE: 
H.B. 72 - Relating to Pharmacy 
Hearing Date: Friday, January 31, 2025 at 9:15 a.m. 
Conference Room: 329 
 
 
Dear Chair Takayama, Vice Chair Keohokapu-Lee Loy, and Members of the 
Committee on Health: 
Walgreens submits these comments in support of H.B. 72 and offers suggested 
amendments.  
Walgreen Co. (“Walgreens”) operates stores at more than 9,000 locations in all 50 
states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico.  In Hawaii, Walgreens has 13 
stores on the islands of Oahu and Maui. 
Pharmacy technicians play an important role in the pharmacy setting by handling a 
range of tasks that allow pharmacists to focus on more complex responsibilities like 
patient consultations and clinical services. For example, pharmacy technicians can 
assist pharmacists with the preparation, dispensing, and managing of patient 
medications. Typically, pharmacy technician tasks include filling prescriptions, 
labeling and packaging medications, managing medication inventory, and performing 
administrative duties such as record-keeping and insurance processing. 
The 2024 Legislature passed Act 104 that allows, in part, pharmacists, pharmacy 
technicians and pharmacy interns the ability to administer immunizations and 
vaccinations to persons three years and older under the direct supervision of a 
pharmacist. This measure builds upon Act 104 to require that pharmacy technicians 
are registered by the state. 
In Hawaii, pharmacy technicians are not currently regulated.  This important 
measure will bring a regulatory framework to the critical role that pharmacy 
technicians fill, which Walgreens supports.  We suggest several amendments to 
clarify the different roles of pharmacy personnel, including roles that don’t perform 
the duties of a pharmacy technician. 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

Page 2 
SanHi Government Strategies 
a limited liability law partnership 
 
First, Walgreens is concerned that this bill as introduced is overly broad in its 
definition of “registered pharmacy technician.” As drafted, this definition would 
capture all pharmacy personnel behind the pharmacy counter, including those 
personnel such as cashiers whose responsibilities are purely clerical in nature. To 
address this concern, Walgreens suggests adding on page 3, section 2 of the bill a 
new definition for “Auxiliary Pharmacy Personnel” as follows: 
“Auxiliary pharmacy personnel” means a person who works in a pharmacy 
assisting a registered pharmacist and registered pharmacy technicians, who 
may perform the following tasks: (1) retrieval tasks such as retrieving 
prescriptions or files, (2) clerical tasks such as data entry, typing labels, and 
maintaining patient profiles, (3) tasks including selling prescriptions, 
telephoning, filing, and typing, (4) accounting tasks such as record keeping, 
maintaining accounts receivables, third party billing and posting, (5) inventory 
control tasks including monitoring, pricing, dating, invoicing, stocking 
pharmacy, and preparation of purchase orders, and (6) help maintain a clean 
and orderly pharmacy. 
Second, to clarify the specific duties of a pharmacy technician, Walgreens also 
suggests the following amendments to the definition of “Registered pharmacy 
technician,” which is language used in other states that regulate pharmacy 
technicians and better clarifies their duties, at page 3, section 2, lines 4-10 as 
follows: 
“Registered pharmacy technician” means a person, exclusive of pharmacy 
interns and auxiliary pharmacy personnel, registered with the board who may 
in addition to the tasks of an auxiliary pharmacy personnel, perform filling, 
packaging, manipulative, repetitive, or other nondiscretionary tasks, and tasks 
specified in Section 461-11.4, only while assisting and while under the direct 
supervision and control of a pharmacist [is utilized in pharmacies and whose 
responsibilities are to provide nonjudgmental technical services concerned 
with the preparation for dispensing of drugs under the direct supervision and 
responsibility of a registered pharmacist]. 
Third, Walgreens suggests the following amendment at 3, section 2, line 10 as 
follows: 
"Supervision" means the [observation], direction, and oversight [overseeing] 
of a registered pharmacy technician or pharmacy intern by a physically 
present, responsible registered pharmacist at all times when either party 
performs acts specified in this chapter or rules adopted pursuant to this 
chapter." 
In the pharmacy setting, the word "observation" implies a direct line of sight by the 
pharmacist over the pharmacy technician or pharmacy intern. In the case of 
vaccinations, a technician may be in the patient room administering a vaccination 
while the pharmacist is behind the counter. This is still considered "direct 

Page 3 
SanHi Government Strategies 
a limited liability law partnership 
supervision" in the pharmacy setting but does not require the technician to be in their 
line of sight. 
Last, we would also suggest replacing the language on page 8, lines 3-8, at 
subsection (c) to establish the specific functions of a pharmacy technician by statute 
versus by administrative rule: 
(c)  A registered pharmacy technician may be employed to perform filling, 
packaging, manipulative, repetitive, or other nondiscretionary tasks, and the 
tasks specified in Section 461-11.4, only while assisting and while under the 
direct supervision and control of a pharmacist and under rules adopted by the 
board pursuant to chapter 91. [A registered pharmacy technician may be 
employed to assist the registered pharmacist under rules adopted by the 
board pursuant to chapter 91 that define the qualifications and functions of 
the registered pharmacy technician and provide the procedures for control 
and supervision by a registered pharmacist.] 
We would be happy to answer any questions you may have.  
Thank you for the opportunity to submit this testimony.  

HB-72 
Submitted on: 1/29/2025 11:01:48 AM 
Testimony for HLT on 1/31/2025 9:15:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Ronald Taniguchi, 
Pharm.D., MBA 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I support pharmacy technician registration.  Mahalo. 
 

Testimony for HB72: A bill to mandate pharmacy technician registration within the DCCA 
House Committee on Health 
Friday, January 31, 2025 
Testimony in SUPPORT of HB72 
 
To the Honorable Chair Takayama Vice Chair Keohokapu-Lee Loy, and Members of the Committee,  
As a pharmacist practicing in in the State of Hawaii, I strongly support HB72, which seeks to establish 
critical regulations for pharmacy technicians in our state. In my practice at Kaier Permanente Hawaii, 
pharmacy technicians are an essential part of the clinical pharmacy workforce. Pharmacy technicians 
engage patients on their medication adherence, collect important patient data (e.g., home blood sugar 
readings) for management by health care providers, and they outreach patients for health maintenance 
(e.g., scheduling follow-up appointments, making reminders for routine lab tests, etc.). Pharmacy 
technicians are the face of pharmacy, directly interacting with patients every day. 
Hawaii is the only state in the nation without an active, managed list of practicing pharmacy technicians, 
leaving a significant gap in oversight that can impact patient safety. Pharmacy technicians play an 
essential role in supporting pharmacists and ensuring the safe preparation and delivery of medications, 
and this initiative will serve as the backbone for consistent standards of training and competency across 
the profession. Additionally, the creation of a pharmacy technician data repository is an essential step 
forward, providing a centralized resource for communicating practice and regulatory changes. 
Beyond enhancing patient safety, HB72 will lay the foundation for pharmacy technicians in Hawaii to 
expand their scope of practice in the future. Across the country, pharmacy technicians are taking on 
advanced roles, such as administering immunizations and assisting with medication management. 
Without regulation, Hawaii cannot adapt to these changes and risks falling behind in providing the best 
possible care to our communities. This initiative comes at a reasonable cost and represents a prudent 
investment in ensuring the safety, efficiency, and adaptability of our pharmacy workforce.  
I urge the Committee to support HB72 and help Hawaii align with national pharmacy technician 
regulation standards to strengthen pharmacy practice in our state. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Shelley K. Kikuchi, PharmD, BCACP 
Director, Clinical Pharmacy Department 
Kaiser Permanente Hawaii 

Testimony for HB72: A bill to mandate pharmacy technician registration within the DCCA 
House Committee on Health 
Friday, January 31, 2025 
Testimony in SUPPORT of HB72 
 
To the Honorable Chair Takayama Vice Chair Keohokapu-Lee Loy, and Members of the Committee,  
As a pharmacist practicing in Hawai‘i, I strongly support HB72, which seeks to establish critical 
regulations for pharmacy technicians in our state. In my practice, pharmacy technicians are essential in 
performing the following tasks that are critical to the workflow of the pharmacy. Without quality 
technicians, the pharmacy cannot operate efficiently and effectively for the patients in the communities 
we serve.  
Hawai‘i is the only state in the nation without an active, managed list of practicing pharmacy technicians, 
leaving a significant gap in oversight that can impact patient safety. Meaning any unlicensed person can 
legally work in a pharmacy with no formal training. Few technicians have independently sought out 
national technician certifications, but there’s a vast amount that lack the skills necessary to assist and 
support the pharmacy workflow. Pharmacy technicians play an essential role in supporting pharmacists 
and ensuring the safe preparation and delivery of medications, and this initiative will serve as the 
backbone for consistent standards of training and competency across the profession. Additionally, the 
creation of a pharmacy technician data repository, is an essential step forward, providing a centralized 
resource for communicating practice and regulatory changes. 
Beyond enhancing patient safety, HB72 will lay the foundation for pharmacy technicians in Hawai‘i to 
expand their scope of practice in the future. Across the country, pharmacy technicians are taking on 
advanced roles, such as administering immunizations and assisting with medication management. 
Without regulation, Hawai‘i cannot adapt to these changes and risks falling behind in providing the best 
possible care to our communities. This initiative comes at a reasonable cost and represents a prudent 
investment in ensuring the safety, efficiency, and adaptability of our pharmacy workforce.  
I urge the Committee to support HB72 and help Hawai‘i align with national pharmacy technician 
regulation standards to strengthen pharmacy practice in our state. 
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Faith Hicks, Pharm D.  
Relief Pharmacist, KTA Pharmacy 

Date:  January 29, 2025 
 
To:  
The Honorable Gregg Takayama, Chair 
The Honorable Sue L. Keohokapu-Lee Loy, Vice Chair 
Members of the House Committee on Health 
 
Re:  
Support for HB72, Relating to Pharmacy 
 
Hrg:  Friday January 31, 2025 at 9:15 am via Videoconference Conference Room 329 
 
Aloha House Committee on Health. 
 
As a licensed Hawai‘i pharmacist and retired Daniel K. Inouye College of Pharmacy faculty, I 
am writing in strong support of HB72, which beginning 1/1/2026, requires pharmacy 
technicians to be registered; imposes a duty on pharmacists-in-charge to report violations 
conducted by registered pharmacy technicians; and, specifies that supervising registered 
pharmacists are responsible for the actions of registered pharmacy technicians and 
pharmacy interns. 
 
Pharmacy technicians play an essential role in supporting pharmacists and ensuring the 
safe preparation and delivery of medications across our state.  
 
Hawai‘i is the only state in the nation without an active, managed list of practicing 
pharmacy technicians, leaving a significant gap in oversight that can impact patient safety. 
HB72 aligns with national pharmacy technician regulation standards to strengthen 
pharmacy practice in Hawai‘i. 
 
HB72 serves as the backbone for consistent standards of training and competency across 
the profession. Creation of a pharmacy technician data repository is an essential step 
forward, providing a centralized resource for communicating practice and regulatory 
changes. 
 
Beyond enhancing patient safety, HB72 lays the foundation for pharmacy technicians in 
Hawai‘i to expand their scope of practice in the future. Across the country, registered 
pharmacy technicians are taking on advanced roles. Without regulation, Hawai‘i cannot 
adopt these changes and risks falling behind in providing the best possible care to our 
communities.  
 
HB72 represents a prudent investment in the safety, efficiency, and adaptability of our 
pharmacy workforce into the future. 
 
I strongly support HB72, respectfully ask you to pass it out of committee. 
  
Many thanks for your consideration, 
 
Forrest Batz, PharmD 
Keaau, HI 

Testimony for HB72: A bill to mandate pharmacy technician registration within the DCCA 
House Committee on Health 
Friday, January 31, 2025 
Testimony in SUPPORT of HB72 
 
To the Honorable Chair Takayama, Vice Chair Keohokapu-Lee Loy, and Members of the Committee,  
My name is Camlyn Masuda and I am an Associate Specialist and Clinical Pharmacist with the University 
of Hawaiʻi at Hilo Daniel K Inouye College of Pharmacy. I appreciate the opportunity to submit testimony 
in support of HB72, a bill to mandate pharmacy technician registration within the DCCA. My testimony 
does not represent the views of the University of Hawaiʻi at Hilo. 
Hawai‘i is currently the only state in the nation without an active, managed list of practicing pharmacy 
technicians. This lack of oversight poses risks to patient safety and limits our profession’s ability to adapt 
to evolving healthcare needs. Regulation is critical to ensuring that pharmacy technicians meet 
consistent standards, enabling us to perform our duties with the highest level of competency and 
accountability. 
By creating a data repository, this bill will also provide a vital resource for communicating practice and 
regulatory changes across the workforce, ensuring alignment with both state and federal requirements. 
I currently provide train students to become pharmacists that work directly with pharmacy technicians. 
Pharmacy technicians play a vital role in helping pharmacist process prescriptions by adjudicating claims 
to insurance companies and assist in filling prescriptions. Pharmacy technicians across the country can 
become nationally certified and provide additional services, such as immunizations, which free up 
pharmacists time to perform more patient care activities keeping the people in Hawai‘I healthier and 
prevent harm by using medications properly and adherent to them. 
The modest cost of this initiative is a small investment that will have a significant impact on the safety, 
efficiency, and quality of care I can provide in our communities. 
I urge the Committee to support HB72 to bring Hawai‘i in line with national standards and to ensure a 
stronger future for pharmacy technicians and pharmacy practice in Hawai’i. 
Sincerely, 
 
Camlyn Masuda, PharmD, CDCES, BCACP 
Associate Specialist, Dept. of Pharmacy Practice 
Daniel K. Inouye College of Pharmacy  
University of Hawaiʻi at Hilo  
677 Ala Moana Blvd.  Ste 1025A 
Honolulu, HI  96813  
Email: camlynm@hawaii.edu 
 

 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

HB-72 
Submitted on: 1/30/2025 10:26:48 AM 
Testimony for HLT on 1/31/2025 9:15:00 AM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Leia Nu 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Testimony for HB72: A bill to mandate pharmacy technician registration within the DCCA 
House Committee on Health 
Friday, January 31, 2025 
Testimony in SUPPORT of HB72 
  
To the Honorable Chair Takayama Vice Chair Keohokapu-Lee Loy, and Members of the 
Committee,  
 
As a pharmacy technician in Hawai‘i, I strongly support HB72, which aims to establish much-
needed  
regulations for pharmacy technicians in our state.Hawai‘i is currently the only state in the nation  
without an active, managed list of practicing pharmacy technicians. This lack of oversight poses 
risks to  
patient safety and limits our profession’s ability to adapt to evolving healthcare needs. 
Regulation is  
critical to ensuring that pharmacy technicians meet consistent standards, enabling us to perform 
our  
duties with the highest level of competency and accountability. 
By creating a data repository, this bill will also provide a vital resource for communicating 
practice and  
regulatory changes across the workforce, ensuring alignment with both state and federal 
requirements. 
HB72 is not only a necessary step toward improving patient safety, but it also lays the foundation 
for  
pharmacy technicians like myself to expand the services we provide in Hawai‘i. As our role 
grows nationally to include responsibilities such as administering immunizations and performing 
medication  
management tasks, regulation will ensure that Hawai‘i is positioned to follow suit. The modest 
cost of this initiative is a small investment that will have a significant impact on the safety, 
efficiency, and  
quality of care I can provide in our communities. 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

I urge the Committee to support HB72 to bring Hawai‘i in line with national standards and to 
ensure a  
stronger future for pharmacy technicians and pharmacy practice in Hawai’i. 
  
Mahalo, 
Leia Nu CPhT 
 
