SSCR1082
STAND. COM. REP. NO.
1082
Honolulu,
Hawaii
RE:
H.B. No. 72
H.D. 2
S.D. 1
Honorable Ronald D. Kouchi
President of the Senate
Thirty-Third State Legislature
Regular Session of 2025
State of Hawaii
Sir:
Your Committee on
Health and Human Services, to which was referred H.B. No. 72, H.D. 2,
entitled:
"A BILL FOR AN ACT RELATING TO PHARMACY,"
begs leave to report as follows:
The
purpose and intent of this measure is to:
(1)
Beginning January 1, 2026, require pharmacy technicians
to be registered with and obtain a certificate of registration from the Board
of Pharmacy;
(2)
Impose a duty on pharmacists-in-charge to
report violations conducted by registered pharmacy technicians; and
(3)
Specify that supervising registered
pharmacists are responsible for the actions of registered pharmacy technicians
and pharmacy interns.
Your Committee
received testimony in support of this measure from the Board of Pharmacy; University
of Hawai
ʻ
i System;
Walgreen Co.; Hawai
ʻ
i
Pharmacists Association; and five individuals.
Your Committee
finds that pharmacy technicians are health care professionals working under the
supervision of a pharmacist and have an essential role in the daily operation
of pharmacies, including the provision of services such as dispensing
medications, processing insurance claims, preparing sterile compounds such as
intravenous solutions and chemotherapy, and with additional certifications,
administering vaccines to patients.
Your
Committee further finds that Hawaii is the only state that does not maintain a
list of practicing pharmacy technicians and that the registration of pharmacy
technicians is warranted and appropriate for the level of responsibility and
trust afforded by the public.
This
measure requires pharmacy technicians to be registered with the Board of
Pharmacy to ensure that pharmacy technicians have the appropriate background
and supervision, can receive timely communications and updates regarding
relevant practice and regulation changes that impact their work, and are able
to access training opportunities as the scope of practice of pharmacy
technicians expands nationwide.
Your Committee has
amended this measure by:
(1)
Deleting
language that would have required the supervision of a registered pharmacy
technician by a registered pharmacist to be "direct"
;
(2)
Deleting
language from the definition of "supervision" that would have
required the responsible registered pharmacist to be physically present to oversee
a registered pharmacy technician or pharmacy technician performing certain acts;
(3)
Inserting
an effective date of December 31,
2050, to encourage
further
discussion; and
(4)
Making
technical, nonsubstantive amendments for the purposes of clarity and
consistency.
As affirmed by the
record of votes of the members of your Committee on Health and Human Services
that is attached to this report, your Committee is in accord with the intent
and purpose of H.B. No. 72, H.D. 2, as amended herein, and recommends
that it pass Second Reading in the form attached hereto as H.B. No. 72,
H.D. 2, S.D. 1, and be referred to your Committee on Commerce and
Consumer Protection.
Respectfully submitted on behalf
of the members of the Committee on Health and Human Services,
________________________________
JOY
  A. SAN BUENAVENTURA, Chair