 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
LT. GOVERNOR 
 
 
 
 
 
DEAN MINAKAMI 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAII 
DEPARTMENT OF BUSINESS, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND TOURISM  
HAWAII HOUSING FINANCE AND DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 
677 QUEEN STREET, SUITE 300 
HONOLULU, HAWAII 96813 
FAX: (808) 587-0600 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Statement of 
DEAN MINAKAMI 
Hawaii Housing Finance and Development Corporation 
Before the 
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON JUDICARY & HAWAIIAN AFFAIRS 
February 06, 2025 at 2:00 p.m. 
State Capitol, Room 325 
In consideration of 
H.B. 740 HD1 
RELATING TO HOUSING 
Chair Tarnas, Vice Chair Poepoe, and members of the Committee.   
HHFDC supports HB 740 HD1, which establishes the Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) 
Financing and Deed Restriction Program to allocate funds to the counties to provide 
grants to eligible homeowners or homebuyers to finance construction costs, 
development costs, and non-reoccurring closing costs associated with the construction 
of an accessory dwelling unit and purchase deed restrictions on such property. It is 
effective 7/1/3000. 
The upfront costs of designing and permitting an ADU are a barrier for many 
homeowners. HHFDC supports the ADU Financing and Deed Restriction program as a 
way to increase the inventory of rental units in the State.  
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this bill. 

TESTIMONY OF 
THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL 
KA ‘OIHANA O KA LOIO KUHINA 
THIRTY-THIRD LEGISLATURE, 2025 
 
 
ON THE FOLLOWING MEASURE: 
H.B. No. 740, H.D. 1, RELATING TO HOUSING. 
 
BEFORE THE: 
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY & HAWAIIAN AFFAIRS 
 
DATE: 
Thursday, February 6, 2025 
TIME:  2:00 p.m. 
LOCATION: State Capitol, Room 325 and Videoconference 
TESTIFIER(S): 
Anne E. Lopez, Attorney General, or  
Chase Suzumoto, Deputy Attorney General or  
Linda L.W. Chow, Deputy Attorney General 
 
 
Chair Tarnas and Members of the Committee:
The Department of the Attorney General offers the following comments. 
The purpose of this bill is to establish an accessory dwelling unit financing and 
deed restriction program under the Hawaii Housing Finance and Development 
Corporation. 
This bill permits the Hawaii Housing Finance and Development Corporation to 
allocate funds from the Dwelling Unit Revolving Fund to a county for the award of grants 
to eligible homeowners and homebuyers to finance various costs associated with the 
construction of accessory dwelling units.  The bill also authorizes the counties to 
purchase deed restrictions from eligible homeowners or homebuyers using funds from 
the Dwelling Unit Revolving Fund. 
This bill does not appear to contain legally sufficient standards for the award of 
such grants involving public money as required by article VII, section 4, of the 
Constitution of the State of Hawai‘i--“[n]o grant of public money . . . shall be made 
except pursuant to standards provided by law.”  Therefore, we recommend that this bill 
be amended to insert appropriate standards.  Examples of existing statutes that provide 
standards for agencies to issue grants are part II of chapter 9 and sections 10-17, 
210D-11, and 383-128, Hawaii Revised Statutes. 

Testimony of the Department of the Attorney General 
Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 
Page 2 of 3 
 
We have attached examples of standards to this testimony for the Committee’s 
consideration.  These or other appropriate standards could be inserted into the bill on 
page 4, line 17 as a new section 201H-B(d) with subsequent subsections redesignated.  
We are also available to work with the Committee on any potential amendments to the 
bill. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this bill. 
 
 

Testimony of the Department of the Attorney General 
Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 
Page 3 of 3 
 
DRAFT GRANT STANDARDS  
(d) 
Applications for grants shall be made to the counties and contain the 
information as required by rules adopted under this subpart.  At a minimum, the 
applicant shall: 
(1) 
Be an eligible homeowner or homebuyer under this subpart; 
(2) 
Agree to use state funds exclusively for the purposes of this program; 
(3) 
Indicate capability to properly use the grant for the purpose of the 
accessory dwelling unit financing and deed restriction program; 
(4) 
Comply with all applicable federal and state laws prohibiting discrimination 
against any person on the basis of race, color, national origin, religion, 
creed, sex, age, sexual orientation, disability, or any other characteristic 
protected under applicable federal or state law; 
(5) 
Agree not to use state funds for purposes of entertainment or perquisites; 
(6) 
Comply with other requirements as the county may prescribe; 
(7) 
Comply with all applicable federal, state, and county statutes, rules, and 
ordinances; 
(8) 
Agree to indemnify and save harmless the State of Hawaii and its officers, 
agents, and employees from and against any and all claims arising out of 
or resulting from activities carried out or projects undertaken with funds 
provided hereunder and procure sufficient insurance to provide this 
indemnification if requested to do so by the corporation; and 
(9) 
Agree to make available to the county all records the applicant may have 
relating to the grant, to allow state agencies to monitor the applicant's 
compliance with this section. 

 
 
 
 
JOSH GREEN M.D. 
GOVERNOR 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
LT. GOVERNOR 
STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
DEPARTMENT OF TAXATION 
Ka ‘Oihana ‘Auhau 
P.O. BOX 259 
HONOLULU, HAWAI‘I 96809 
PHONE NO: (808) 587-1540 
FAX NO: (808) 587-1560 
GARY S. SUGANUMA 
DIRECTOR  
 
KRISTEN M.R. SAKAMOTO 
DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF 
GARY S. SUGANUMA, DIRECTOR OF TAXATION 
 
 
TESTIMONY ON THE FOLLOWING MEASURE: 
H.B. No. 740, H.D. 1, Relating to Housing. 
 
BEFORE THE: 
House Committee on Judiciary & Hawaiian Affairs 
 
 
DATE: 
 
Thursday, February 6, 2025 
TIME:  
 
2:00 p.m. 
LOCATION:  
State Capitol, Room 325 
 
 
Chair Tarnas, Vice-Chair Poepoe, and Members of the Committee: 
 
The Department of Taxation (DOTAX) offers the following comments regarding 
H.B. 740, H.D. 1, for your consideration. 
 
Section 6 of H.B. 740, H.D. 1, amends section 247-3, Hawaii Revised Statutes 
(HRS), to exempt from conveyance tax any property with a county owned deed 
restriction according to the new provisions under chapter 201H, HRS, in this bill.  
 
The measure has a defective effective date of July 1, 3000. 
 
DOTAX requests that if this bill is passed, section 6 take effect on January 1, 
2026, to allow for form and instruction changes necessary to implement the proposed 
conveyance tax exemption. 
 
DOTAX also requests clarification on whether the exemption is intended to apply 
to actual conveyances of county owned deed restrictions.  If so, then DOTAX 
recommends that page 28, lines 13-15 be revised as follows: 
 
(18)  Any document or instrument conveying 

Department of Taxation Testimony 
H.B. 740, H.D. 1 
February 6, 2024 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
 
real property with a county owned deed 
restriction pursuant to subpart __, part III 
of chapter 201H, including any document or 
instrument conveying such a county owned 
deed restriction. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments on this measure.  

Council Chair 
Director of Council Services 
  Alice L. Lee 
David M. Raatz, Jr., Esq. 
 
Vice-Chair 
Deputy Director of Council Services 
  Yuki Lei K. Sugimura 
Richelle K. Kawasaki, Esq. 
 
Presiding Officer Pro Tempore 
  Tasha Kama 
 
Councilmembers 
  Tom Cook 
  Gabe Johnson 
  Tamara Paltin 
  Keani N.W. Rawlins-Fernandez 
  Shane M. Sinenci 
  Nohelani U‘u-Hodgins 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY COUNCIL 
COUNTY OF MAUI 
200 S. HIGH STREET 
WAILUKU, MAUI, HAWAII  96793 
www.MauiCounty.us 
 
February 5, 2025 
 
TO: 
The Honorable David A. Tarnas, Chair 
 
The Honorable Mahina Poepoe, Vice Chair 
 
and Members of the House Committee on Judiciary and Hawaiian Affairs 
FROM: 
Alice L. Lee 
 
Council Chair 
SUBJECT: HEARING OF FEBRUARY 6, 2025; TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF HB 740, 
HD1, RELATING TO HOUSING 
 
I support this measure to establish an Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) Financing and 
Deed Restriction Program under the Hawaiʻi Housing Finance and Development 
Corporation. 
The Maui County Council has not had the opportunity to take a formal position on this 
measure.  Therefore, I am providing this testimony in my capacity as an individual 
member of the Maui County Council. 
 
I support this measure for the following reasons: 
1. 
By reducing financial barriers to ADU construction, this bill encourages 
homeowners to develop additional housing units on their properties. These 
units can provide long-term rental options for local families, kūpuna, and 
workforce members who are struggling to find stable housing. 
2. 
The voluntary deed restriction program helps prevent ADUs from being 
used for short-term rentals or speculative resale. By preserving these units 
for local residents, this bill ensures that the benefits of increased housing 
stock remain within the community for generations to come. 
3. 
Instead of requiring counties to apply for individual grants, this bill 
streamlines the process by allocating an annual lump sum, allowing 
counties to effectively plan, administer, and distribute resources to 
homeowners based on their specific housing needs. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
 
ocs:proj:legis:25legis:25testimony:hb740hd1_paf25-007(10)_kjh 

C. Kimo Alameda, Ph.D.
_--‘ ‘
" ~ ..
.- 1*.--.1’
-_
.
Mayor
_-
-'
Kehaulani M. Costa
_." '
tw
_‘_
Housing Administrator
William v. Brilhante Jr.
5 .5 As '1'»,i._,f//, =. 3
Managing Director
-_ '-_ ~*Y:_!§_,.
;
Keiko M. Mercado
-. ; _,.;.’;,
Assistant Housing Administrator
Merrick Nishimoto
'i'aa'a'-
Deputy Managing Director
_
'
' 9
County of Hawai‘i
Office of Housing and Community Development
1990 Kino‘ole Street, Suite 102 - nut», Hawai‘i 96720 - (808)961-8379 - Fax (808)961-8685
Existing Housing: (808) 959-4642
-
Fax (808) 959-9308
Kona: (808)323-4300 - Fa.x(808)323-4301
February 5, 2025
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF HOUSE BILL 740, HD1
A BILL FOR AN ACT RELATING TO HOUSING
COMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY & HAWAIIAN AFFAIRS
Rep. David Tarnas, Chair
Rep. Mahina Poepoe, Vice Chair
Hearing Date: Wednesday, February 6, 2025, at 2:00 PM
Place of Hearing: Conference Room 325 & Videoconference
Aloha Honorable Chairs Tamas and Poepoe, and members of the Committee on
Judiciary & Hawaiian Affairs,
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on House Bill 740, HD1, which
proposes the establishment of an accessory dwelling unit (ADU) ﬁnancing and deed
restriction program under the Hawai‘i Housing Finance and Development Corporation
(HHFDC). On behalf of the County of Hawai‘i Ofﬁce of Housing and Community
Development (OHCD), we express our ﬁrm support for this important initiative to
address the housing crisis in Hawai‘i.
ADUs offer an effective solution to increase housing supply, especially in residential
areas with available space for additional dwellings. However, the upfront costs of design
and permitting remain a signiﬁcant barrier to homeowners. This bill provides essential
ﬁnancial support to homeowners who are willing to build ADUs but lack the funds to do
so.
Furthermore, the program includes a deed restriction component, ensuring the long-
term affordability of housing, which is critical in a state where housing costs continue to
rise.
Additionally, the County of Hawai‘i’s recent Ordinance 24-7, passed in fall 2024, allows
residents to build up to three ADUs on their property. This bill complements that effort
and provides a much-needed tool for homeowners to contribute to the housing solution.
EQUAL
OPPOQ6zé52‘

February 5, 2025
Page 2
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in support of HB 740, HD1. Passage
of this measure will help provide immediate housing opportunities while securing long-
term affordability.
Mahalo,
K/9900/1/‘
Kehaulani M. Costa
Housing Administrator

 
REALTOR® is a registered collective membership mark which may be used only by real estate professionals 
who are members of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS® and subscribe to its strict Code of Ethics. 
 
808-733-7060    
    1259 A‘ala Street, Suite 300 
        
 
                 Honolulu, HI 96817 
808-737-4977  
 
February 6, 2025 
 
The Honorable David A. Tarnas, Chair 
House Committee on Judiciary & Hawaiian Affairs 
State Capitol, Conference Room 325 & Videoconference 
 
RE: House Bill 740, HD1, Relating to Housing 
 
HEARING: Wednesday, January 29, 2024, at 9:15 a.m. 
 
 
Aloha Chair Tarnas, Vice Chair Poepoe, and Members of the Committee: 
 
My name is Lyndsey Garcia, Director of Advocacy, testifying on behalf of the 
Hawai‘i Association of REALTORS® (“HAR”), the voice of real estate in Hawaii and its 
over 10,000 members. HAR provides comments on House Bill 740, HD1, which 
establishes the Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program to 
allocate funds to the counties to provide grants to eligible homeowners or homebuyers 
to finance construction costs, development costs, and non-reoccurring closing costs 
associated with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit and purchase deed 
restrictions on such property. Effective 7/1/3000. 
 
Hawai‘i REALTORS® supports the creation of accessory dwelling units to help 
increase the supply of housing and help address Hawaii’s housing challenges. We do 
however have concerns that the deed restrictions contained in this measure are in 
perpetuity. Having deed restrictions on a property in perpetuity can be problematic 
especially in land use planning, as communities can change and uses for a property 
may need to change as well over time. We respectfully suggest that the deed restriction 
be amortized over 10 years, but are open to other proposals for alternative timeframes. 
We look forward to further discussions on this matter. 
 
Mahalo for the opportunity to provide testimony on this measure. 
 

 
    C L A R E N C E  T .  C .  C H I N G  C A M P U S   1 8 2 2  K e ‘ e a u m o k u  S t r e e t ,  H o n o l u l u ,  H I  9 6 8 2 2  
    P h o n e  ( 8 0 8 ) 5 2 7 - 4 8 1 3    
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF HB 740 HD1:  RELATING TO HOUSING 
 
TO:  
House Committee on Judiciary and Hawaiian Affairs 
 
FROM: 
Tina Andrade, President and CEO, Catholic Charities Hawai`i 
 
Hearing: 
Thursday, February 6, 2025; CR 325 & via Videoconference 
 
Chair Tarnas, Vice Chair Poepoe, and Members, Committee on Judiciary and Hawaiian Affairs: 
 
Catholic Charities Hawai`i Supports HB 740 HD1, which establishes the Accessory Dwelling 
Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program.  It allocates funds to the counties for grants to 
eligible homeowners/homebuyers to develop accessory dwelling units and to purchase deed 
restrictions on these properties. 
 
Catholic Charities Hawai`i (CCH) is a tax exempt, non-profit agency that has been providing 
social services in Hawai`i for over 75 years.  CCH has programs serving elders, children, 
families, homeless and immigrants.  Our mission is to provide services and advocacy to the most 
vulnerable of the people in Hawai`i.  Creating affordable housing and ending homelessness are 
our top priorities. 
 
Hawai`i is in critical need of more housing for our local residents, as soon as possible.  Creating 
accessory dwelling units (ADU) could more rapidly produce many housing units as well as 
securing these units for local residents, particularly our workforce.  Many studies have reported 
that a high percentage of our workforce is considering moving away from Hawai`i.  A major 
reason is the lack of housing which drives up rents.  Assisting property owners to build an ADU, 
on their own land, can provide more options in our housing tool box.  Implementing deed 
restriction on the property will ensure they target our local workers as well as elders and disabled 
people. 
 
We support the Legislature’s efforts to clarify any constitutional issues regarding the deed 
restrictions so that these government assisted ADUs can be targeted to bona fide Hawai`i 
residents. 
 
Catholic Charities Hawai`i urges your support of this bill.   
 
If you have any questions, please contact our Legislative Liaison, Betty Lou Larson, at (808) 
527-4813.  

 
Hawai‘i YIMBY 
Honolulu, HI 96814 
hawaiiyimby.org 
info@hawaiiyimby.org 
 
February 6, 2025 
House Committee on Judiciary & Hawaiian Affairs 
Hawai‘i State Capitol 
Honolulu, HI 96813 
 
RE: SUPPORT for HB 740 - RELATING TO HOUSING 
 
Aloha Chair Tarnas, Vice Chair Poepoe, and Members of the Committee, 
 
On behalf of Hawai‘i YIMBY, we are writing in support of HB 740 which would establish 
the Additional Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program, funding and 
allowing counties to purchase voluntary deed restrictions from eligible homeowners and 
homebuyers. Those eligible may use the funds towards the cost of constructing an ADU. 
ADUs are an important type of housing that adds gentle density to existing, established 
neighborhoods. ADUs can house a young professional, a retired grandparent, or many 
other members of the community. However, many homeowners lack the money to build an 
ADU, despite having the willingness and space. 
We believe in fixing incentives, and this includes creating innovative and targeted 
incentives. Hawai‘i homebuyers continue to struggle to compete with non-Hawai‘i buyers 
both because of lack of funds and a non-dedicated housing stock. This innovative 
incentive will let counties purchase voluntary deed restrictions that require the 
owner-occupant and/or renters be recently retired from or is a full time employee of a 
Hawai‘i business, with appropriate protections for those experiencing involuntary 
unemployment or disability. In the long-term, more homeowners would volunteer for the 
deed restriction and build ADUs. This will create a stock of homes dedicated to those who 
work and live in Hawai‘i. 
1 

 
Hawai‘i YIMBY 
Honolulu, HI 96814 
hawaiiyimby.org 
info@hawaiiyimby.org 
 
This alone will not solve the housing crisis, however, it will increase our overall supply of 
housing. Although small, building ADUs on plots of land that previously only had one unit, 
increasing the number of units on that same plot to two or three, is a much more efficient 
and affordable use of space. 
Hawai‘i YIMBY (Yes In My Backyard) is a volunteer-led grassroots advocacy organization 
dedicated to supporting bold and effective solutions for Hawai‘i’s devastating housing 
crisis. Our members are deeply concerned about Hawai‘i’s chronic and worsening housing 
shortage, which has caused home prices to rise much faster than incomes and pushes 
thousands of kamaʻāina out to the mainland or into homelessness every single year. 
We ask your support for this bill. Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
 
Sincerely, 
Damien Waikoloa 
Chapter Lead, Hawai‘i YIMBY 
 
Edgardo Díaz Vega 
Chapter Lead, Hawai‘i YIMBY 
 
 
2 

 
 
 
 
Testimony of the Hawai‘i Appleseed Center for Law and Economic Justice 
Support for HB 740 HD1 – Relating to Housing 
House Committee on Judiciary & Hawaiian Affairs 
Thursday, February 6, 2025 at 2:00PM | Conf. Rm. 325  and via Videoconference 
 
Aloha Chair Tarnas, Vice Chair Poepoe, and Members of the Committee: 
Mahalo for the opportunity to testify in strong support of HB740 HD1, which would establish an 
Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) Financing and Deed Restriction Program. 
This innovative legislation addresses two critical challenges facing our communities: the severe 
shortage of affordable housing causing an increase in cost burdened households and the 
subsequent displacement of local families. By providing grants for ADU construction while 
ensuring long-term affordability through deed restrictions, this bill offers a practical solution that 
could create immediate housing opportunities while preserving them for Hawaii's workforce. 
Approximately 56% of households across the state are rent-burdened, that is spending more 
than 30% of their income on rent1 
Additionally, this bill addresses concerns which were expressed by community members after 
the passing of Act 39 by providing financial means for our local homeowners to participate in 
and contribute to addressing our housing shortage as well as making Hawaii a place where 
residents can remain. 
We strongly support this measure for several key reasons: 
Addresses Financial Barriers: Estimates for ADU construction in Hawaii is about 
$250-$350 per square feet2. Many homeowners who wish to build ADUs to help address 
our housing crisis face significant financial barriers. The grant program will make it 
possible for more moderate-income homeowners to participate in creating housing 
solutions. 
Protects Local Workforce: The deed restriction requirements ensuring occupancy by 
local workers, maintaining employment within the county, demonstrate a thoughtful 
approach to preserving housing for Hawaii's working families. This helps prevent the 
conversion of these units to vacation rentals or investment properties and help establish 
a locals only market. 
Creates Sustainable Solutions: The perpetual deed restrictions ensure that these 
housing units will remain available for local workers and residents for generations to 
2 
https://www.talbuilders.com/adu/#:~:text=How%20Much%20Do%20ADUs%20Cost,to%20$350%20per%
20square%20foot.  
1 https://uhero.hawaii.edu/wp-content/uploads/2024/05/HawaiiHousingFactbook2024.pdf  

 
 
 
 
Testimony of the Hawai‘i Appleseed Center for Law and Economic Justice 
Support for HB 740 HD1 – Relating to Housing 
House Committee on Judiciary & Hawaiian Affairs 
Thursday, February 6, 2025 at 2:00PM | Conf. Rm. 325  and via Videoconference 
 
come, creating a lasting legacy of workforce housing that grows over time as more 
homeowners participate in the program. 
Empowers Residents to Actively Contribute: This program enables resident 
homeowners to play an active role in addressing Hawaii's housing challenges, 
empowering them to become part of the solution and directly contribute to building a 
stronger, more sustainable community. 
The bill also includes important accountability measures, such as annual reporting requirements 
and clear qualification criteria for both property owners and tenants. These provisions help 
ensure the program serves its intended purpose while remaining transparent and accountable to 
the public. 
Aligned with Hawaii Appleseed’s mission to promote social and economic justice, we view this 
program as an essential tool for tackling Hawaii's housing crisis while helping working 
families stay rooted in their communities. By pairing financial assistance with long-term 
affordability requirements, the program strikes a thoughtful balance that benefits both present 
and future generations. 
We respectfully urge your committee to pass HB 740 HD1. This legislation represents a 
significant step forward in creating sustainable, community-based solutions to our housing 
challenges while protecting opportunities for local working families and establishing a true 
“locals only” housing market. 
Mahalo for the opportunity to testify on this measure. 
Sincerely, 
Arjuna Heim 
Director of Housing Policy 

L E G I S L A T I V E    T A X    B I L L    S E R V I C E 
TAX FOUNDATION OF HAWAII 
735 Bishop Street, Suite 417 
 
Honolulu, Hawaii 96813  Tel. 536-4587 
 
 
SUBJECT:  CONVEYANCE; Accessory Dwelling Units; Grants; Voluntary Deed Restrictions; 
Dwelling Unit Revolving Fund 
BILL NUMBER: HB 740 HD 1 
INTRODUCED BY: House Committee on Housing 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: Establishes the Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed 
Restriction Program to allocate funds to the counties to provide grants to eligible homeowners or 
homebuyers to finance construction costs, development costs, and non-reoccurring closing costs 
associated with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit and purchase deed restrictions on 
such property. 
SYNOPSIS:  Adds a new part to chapter 201H, HRS, to establish the program.  Under the 
program, the HHFDC is allowed to allocate funds from the Dwelling Unit Revolving Fund to a 
county to (1)  Provide grants to eligible homeowners or homebuyers to finance construction 
costs, development costs, and non‑reoccurring closing costs associated with the construction of 
an accessory dwelling unit; and (2)  Purchase a deed restriction from eligible homeowners or 
homebuyers to be placed on the primary dwelling unit and accessory dwelling unit funded under 
this program. 
The deed restriction placed on a property and owned by a county shall require that the property 
be occupied by at least one owner-occupant or tenant who: 
(1)  Works an average of thirty hours or more per week at a qualified business; 
(2)  Is involuntarily unemployed: 
(A)  From a job in which the owner-occupant or tenant worked an average of 
thirty hours or more per week at a qualified business at the time of initial occupancy; and 
(B)  For a period of less than three hundred sixty-five days; 
(3)  Is retired; provided that the retiree: 
(A)  Was sixty-five years of age or older at the time of retirement; and 
(B)  Worked an average of thirty hours or more per week at a qualified business 
within the county; or 
(4)  Has a disability, as defined in section 515-2, HRS; provided that the owner or tenant 
with a disability worked an average of thirty hours or more per week at a qualified business. 
Makes conforming changes to section 46-15.2, HRS, to allow the counties power to 
participate in the program. 

Re:  HB 740 HD 1 
Page 2 
Amends section 103D-102, HRS, to provide that purchasing deed restrictions under the 
program is exempt from the Procurement Code. 
Makes a conforming change to section 201H-191, HRS, that governs the DURF. 
Amends section 247-3, HRS, to allow a conveyance tax exemption for any conveyance of 
real property with a county owned deed restriction under this program. 
Makes a conforming change to section 525-4, HRS, to allow the deed restriction to be 
permanent and not subject to the rule against perpetuities. 
EFFECTIVE DATE: July 1, 3000.   
STAFF COMMENTS:  If it is decided to implement this program and allow a conveyance tax 
exemption for properties on which a deed restriction is recorded, perhaps consideration should be 
given to the document that places the deed restriction on the property in the first place, because 
the conveyance creating the restriction will be for consideration and it is not clear that any of the 
existing exemptions in section 247-3, HRS, would apply to that conveyance. 
Digested:  2/4/2025 

 
OUR MISSION 
To support and advance public policies 
that make Hawai‘i affordable for all 
working families. 
OUR VISION 
Collaborative, sustainable, and 
evidence-based public policies that 
create a diverse and sustainable 
Hawai‘i economy, an abundance of 
quality job opportunities, and a future 
where all working families living in 
Hawai‘i can thrive. 
BOARD MEMBERS 
Jason Fujimoto 
Meli James, Board Chair 
Micah Kāne 
Brandon Kurisu 
Brad Nicolai 
Mike Pietsch 
Sunshine Topping 
ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
Josh Feldman 
Brittany Heyd 
Alicia Moy 
Ed Schultz 
Josh Wisch 
President & Executive Director 
827 Fort Street Mall, 2nd Floor 
Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96813 
+1 (808) 542-4089 
info@holomuacollaborative.org 
HolomuaCollaborative.org 
Page 1 of 2 
 
 
 
 
 
Committee:  
 
House Committee on Judiciary and Hawaiian Affairs 
Bill Number:  
 
HB 740 HD1, Relating to Housing 
Hearing Date and Time: February 6, 2025, 02:00pm (Room 325) 
Re: 
 
 
Testimony of Holomua Collaborative – Support  
 
Aloha Chair Tarnas, Vice Chair Poepoe, and members of the committee: 
 
Mahalo for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of HB740 HD1, Relating to 
Housing.  This bill would establish and fund the Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and 
Deed Restriction Program. 
 
Hawai‘i remains in a housing crisis. Skyrocketing home prices leave many local 
families struggling to secure safe, attainable places to live. The median home price in 
Hawai‘i now exceeds $800,000—an impossible amount for most residents. As a result, 
many local families are being forced to leave in search of affordable living options 
elsewhere. Between July 2022 and July 2023 alone, an average of twelve people left 
Hawai‘i every day.1 More Native Hawaiians now live outside Hawai‘i than within it. This 
is a loss of our culture, traditions, and the essence of what makes Hawai‘i home. 
 
In October 2024, a survey2 gathering information about the day-to-day financial 
experience of local workers was released and it suggests this growing crisis has the 
potential to reach staggering levels. When nearly 1,500 local workers were asked if 
they may need to move to a less expensive state, only thirty-one percent answered a 
definitive “no,” while sixty-nine percent said “yes” or “unsure.” And nearly two-thirds 
of the respondents said the cost of housing was the primary impact on their cost of 
living in Hawai‘i. Each local worker and family we lose to the continent contributes to 
a loss of our economy, our culture, and our family. 
 
A Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism (DBEDT) study from 
March 2024 found that Hawai‘i needs to grow it’s housing stock by between 2,482 and 
4,112 per year from 2025 to 2035 to meet housing demand. 3 
The Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) Financing and Deed Restriction Program is a 
voluntary initiative that would create a dedicated housing supply for local residents by  
 
 
1 U.S. Census Bureau, Population Division Estimates, released on March 14, 2024; and 
calculations by the Hawai‘i State Department of Business, Economic Development & 
Tourism, Hawai‘i State Data Center. 
https://files.hawaii.gov/dbedt/census/popestimate/2023/county-
pop/2023_daily_est_counties.pdf 
 
2 https://holomuacollective.org/survey/  
 
3 Hawaii Housing Demand: 2025-2035  
https://files.hawaii.gov/dbedt/economic/reports/hawaii_housing_demand_2024_fina
l.pdf 

 
 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
empowering the Counties to purchase perpetual deed restrictions on properties that 
require occupants to live and work in Hawai‘i in return for the construction costs of an  
ADU. In the face of our state's ongoing housing crisis, this program represents an 
important investment in building the housing units necessary to meet our housing 
demands. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Joshua Wisch 
President & Executive Director 

 
 
 
Testimony in Support of HB 740 HD1, Relating to Housing 
 
From: Micah Kāne, Chief Executive Officer & President - Hawaiʻi Community Foundation 
 
Re:  Support for the Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program 
 
The Hawaiʻi Community Foundation (HCF) supports HB 740 HD1, which establishes the Accessory 
Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program. Housing is a priority area within HCF’s CHANGE 
Framework under the “C” sector of Community-Centered Economy. Per UHERO, “median housing costs 
in Hawaii are more than 2.7 times the national level”1 and median rents are the highest in the country.2  
ALICE families are more vulnerable because of our current housing market. 
   
The demand for attainable local housing currently enveloping Hawaiʻi is at crisis levels. Too many people 
who do not live or work in Hawai‘i are owning and driving up the costs of our housing market, which 
contributes to a record outmigration of local residents. The agony of this dynamic punctuated by the 
fact that more Hawaiians now live out of Hawaiʻi than in Hawaiʻi.   
 
While efforts to address the housing crisis have shown progress, it is evident that the current 
perspectives and efforts need to be expanded, and new creative solutions must be adopted. Hyper 
prioritization of major off-site infrastructure improvements that can effectuate housing, broad-based 
collaboration and regulatory reform are more critical now than ever.   
 
We support the creation of the Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program 
because it represents a new and creative solution. The program envisioned by this bill will 
simultaneously increase our housing supply while also dedicating units to be used for local workforce 
housing. Each deed restriction sold under this program is a promise to the community that another 
home is available for a working family in perpetuity.  
 
Kamaʻāina want to stay in Hawaiʻi and HB 740 HD1 can open that door and provide that hope. There is 
universal agreement that locals need more places to call home. Homes must be affordable so residents 
will be free from the pressure of leaving the island. HB 740 HD1 is an innovative solution that 
contributes to more housing for our community, and HCF is happy to support it.  
 
 
 
1 UHERO 2023 Hawaii Housing Factbook at page 1. 
2 UHERO 2024 Hawaii Housing Factbook at page 6. 

 
 
 
February 6, 2025 
 
Tes$mony in support of HB 740 HD1, Rela$ng to Housing 
 
Aloha Chair Tarnas, Vice Chair Poepoe, and Committee Members, 
 
We write in support of HB 740 HD1, Relating to Housing, which would establish the Accessory 
Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed RestricKon Program to place voluntary deed restricKons on 
homes and accessory dwelling units (ADU) that will be dedicated for local working residents in 
exchange for the ﬁnancing the construcKon of an ADU.  
 
Title Guaranty of Hawai‘i is the oldest and largest Ktle company in the state. We have been 
owned and operated by a kama‘aina family since 1896 and we are proud to employ over 250 
residents who work in our branches across the state. As an organizaKon that has worked for 
over a century to help connect local families with housing, we see ﬁrsthand the economic shiX 
that is prevenKng local families from achieving the dream of homeownership. 
 
The Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed RestricKon Program is an innovaKve proposal 
to create a new pool of residenKal real estate that is restricted to local residents while building 
new housing units. This will enable locals to get into Hawaii’s Kght housing market by restricKng 
housing stock for local families and promoKng a local workforce. This program is oﬀering 
property sellers and buyers ﬁnancing for the construcKon of an ADU on their property in 
exchange for voluntarily placing a deed restricKon on their property that restricts the types of 
future buyers and/or tenants to Hawai‘i residents. The proposal accomplishes this by tying the 
voluntary deed restricKon to residency and work requirements. It enables locals to compete 
with mainland buyers when buying a home and it also encourage property owners to rent to 
locals long term instead of leaving homes vacant. 
 
HB 740 HD1 is an original solution that invests in our community and in culture, and I hope that 
you support this effort to keep local residents in Hawai‘i. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mike B. Pietsch 
President and Chief OperaKng Oﬃcer 
Title Guaranty of Hawai‘i 

 
 
1 
 
Testimony to  
House Committee on Housing 
February 6, 2025 
2:00 PM 
Conference Room 430 & VIA videoconference  
Hawaii State Capitol 
HB 740 HD1 
  
Aloha Chair Tarnas, Vice Chair Poepoe, and members of the Committee, 
 
We write in support of HB 740 HD1. This bill will increase our housing supply for local working 
families in Hawaiʻi. 
 
Established in 1904, Hawaiʻi Gas serves over 70,000 customers on all islands through its utility 
pipeline infrastructure and propane business, all of whom depend on the company for 
sustainable, reliable, and affordable gas for water heating, cooking, drying, and other 
commercial and industrial applications. The company employs some 350 professionals, over 
75% of whom are under collective bargaining.  
 
The stability of our local workforce is directly tied to the ability of local families to live and work 
in Hawaiʻi. Housing instability has a direct impact on the workforce’s ability to remain in the 
state and to continue supporting the essential infrastructure that allows businesses like ours to 
thrive and serve the public. 
 
Our company relies on a dedicated workforce of technicians, engineers, and support staff who 
ensure that the gas services we provide are safe, reliable, and accessible to all residents. 
However, the rising cost of housing makes it increasingly difficult for these essential workers to 
remain in the state. The Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program offers 
a meaningful solution by ensuring that local families can secure housing in their communities 
through deed restricted housing and the construction of accessory dwelling units, thereby 
providing a stable and skilled workforce that is essential to industries like ours. 
 
HB 740 addresses long-term workforce sustainability, ensuring that employees who work in 
critical infrastructure sectors like energy can stay in Hawai‘i and continue their work without 
the constant threat of displacement. It is a smart, forward-thinking solution that will benefit all 
sectors of our economy. 
 
We urge you to support HB 740 HD1, as it represents an investment in Hawaii’s workforce, 
infrastructure, and long-term prosperity. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
680 Iwilei Rd 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
     
(808) 354-1238 
Suite 420               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aloha@manauphawaii.com 
Honolulu, HI 96817 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
            
manauphawaii.com 
 
Statement of 
Meli James and Brittany Heyd 
Cofounders 
Mana Up  
 
HB740 HD1, Relating to Housing 
 
Aloha Chair Tarnas, Vice Chair Poepoe, and committee members, 
 
We support HB740 HD1, which establishes the Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction 
Program to provide voluntary deed restrictions to willing eligible homeowners and homebuyers who 
agree to limit the use of their property for local working occupants in exchange for funding to help the 
construction of an accessory dwelling unit (ADU). 
 
Mana Up is a statewide initiative that helps provide entrepreneurs in Hawai‘i with the resources and tools 
to grow their business and scale globally. As these entrepreneurs continue to grow, they also help 
contribute to our expanding our local economy. As part of our mission, we aim to sustain the local 
economy through economic diversification, local job creation, community giveback, investment, and a 
regenerative culture of entrepreneurship – providing a better future for generations to come here in 
Hawai‘i. To keep these types of entrepreneurs in Hawai’i and even expand our entrepreneurial 
ecosystem, though, these entrepreneurs need a place to live that they can afford.  
 
We repeatedly hear from our entrepreneurs about the difficultly they have in finding attainable housing 
that provides them the safety and security necessary to focus on their business and family. Local 
entrepreneurs want to create and expand their business in Hawai‘i, but far too often feel that opportunities 
for housing and business are better on the continent. 
 
Creating a dedicated housing stock for our local workforce will help our families have security as they 
navigate the difficult economic conditions that face the State. The Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and 
Deed Restriction Program incentivizes local homeowners and buyers to voluntarily be a part of the 
solution to create a permanent dedicated housing stock for local families.  Housing is a challenge for 
everyone, and by coming together, we can find shared solutions that help all the people of Hawai‘i. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Meli James | Cofounder, Mana Up 
Brittany Heyd | Cofounder, Mana Up 

 
 
 
February 6, 2025 
 
Committee:  
House Committee on Judiciary and Hawaiian Affairs 
Bill Number:  
HB740 HD1, Relating to Housing 
Hearing Date and Time: 
 
February 6, 2025, 2:00pm 
Re: 
 
 
 
 
Testimony of HPM Building Supply in Support  
 
Dear Chair Tarnas, Vice Chair Poepoe, and Committee Members: 
  
I would like to submit this testimony in support of HB740 HD1, Relating to Housing. The purpose of 
HB740 HD1 is to create a dedicated local housing market through the establishment of the Accessory 
Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program. 
  
HPM Building Supply is a 100% employee-owned company serving Hawaii's home improvement market 
and building industry for over 100 years since 1921. With 18 locations across Hawai‘i and Washington 
State, HPM offers various services and products, including retail stores, building supply and lumber 
yards, home design centers, drafting and design services, and manufacturing facilities. HPM is dedicated 
to enhancing homes, improving lives, and transforming communities.   
 
A significant portion of our workforce consists of skilled tradespeople like carpenters, electricians, and 
plumbers, all of whom are integral to the construction process. However, as housing prices rise and rental 
prices soar, these workers are forced to leave the state in search of more affordable living situations. The 
result is a shortage of skilled labor in the construction sector, leading to delays and higher costs for 
homeowners and developers alike. The Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction 
Program offers a solution to this by ensuring that local workers have a place to live in the same 
communities where they work. 
 
HB 740’s approach—creating deed-restricted housing and constructing accessory dwelling units 
dedicated to local working residents—will help stabilize the housing market by giving local workers a 
fighting chance in a competitive market in which wealthier non-residents often have an advantage. With 
more local residents able to afford homes and stay in the state we will have a stronger, more sustainable 
construction industry that benefits everyone, from homeowners to contractors and beyond. 
 
I ask for your support of HB740 HD1, as it provides the foundation for a more robust, locally employed, 
and efficient building industry that will meet the needs of Hawaii’s growing population. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Jason Fujimoto 
Chairman & CEO 
 

 
 
 
 
Testimony in Support of HB 740 HD1, Relating to Housing 
 
 
 
 
Aloha Chair Tarnas, Vice Chair Poepoe, and members of the Committee, 
 
We write in strong support of HB 740 HD1 which will establish the Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed 
Restriction Program allowing interested homeowners and homebuyers to voluntarily sell a deed restriction on 
their property that limit the occupancy of the property to our local workforce. 
 
aio is a locally owned company with holdings across a broad range of industries. Our companies are purpose-
driven and firmly rooted in local values. At aio, Hawai‘i is at our core, and through our products and services, 
we work hard to make Hawai‘i a better place for future generations. 
 
Hawaiʻi is in the midst of a housing crisis. Our employees are our greatest asset, and we want to ensure that 
they have access to quality and attainable housing. This program is a good first step at establishing a housing 
market that is dedicated to local working families rather than out-of-state purchasers.  
 
Mahalo for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of HB 740 HD1. 
 
 
 
Brandon Kurisu 
aio Family of Companies 

 
 
 
February 6, 2025 
 
Aloha Chair Tarnas, Vice Chair Poepoe, and members of the Committee, 
 
We write in support of HB 740 HD1 and the creation of the Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing 
and Deed Restriction Program. 
Tori Richard has manufactured in Honolulu nearly 70 years, and we continue to proudly do so 
today. As a long-time medium-sized Hawai‘i employer, we recognize the challenge high housing 
costs pose to everyone working to make ends meet in Hawai‘i.  
Our business is deeply committed to supporting Hawaii’s local workforce, but the growing 
housing crisis makes it increasingly difficult for our employees to remain in the islands. 
Attainable housing is key to keeping talented, creative people in Hawai‘i, and this bill offers a 
much-needed solution to that challenge. 
Many of our employees are struggling to find attainable places to live. As their employer, I see 
firsthand the impact this has on their lives. When workers are forced to move away or leave the 
state altogether, it hurts our ability to operate and expand. The Accessory Dwelling Unit 
Financing and Deed Restriction Program ensures that local workers, like those in the fashion, 
manufacturing, and retail industries, have a place to call home. This stability will allow them to 
continue contributing to Hawai‘i’s vibrant economy and support local businesses. 
Moreover, as a company that takes pride in being part of the local community, we understand the 
importance of preserving Hawaii’s unique cultural identity. The housing crisis threatens that 
identity, as local residents are pushed out by non-resident investors and wealthy buyers. HB 740 
will help reverse this trend by providing a steady supply of attainable homes dedicated to local 
residents through the building of accessory dwelling units and restriction of homes for use by our 
local residents, ensuring that our workforce and community remain strong and diverse. 
I urge you to support HB 740 HD1, as it is essential to the future of our business and the local 
economy. Thank you for your consideration. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Josh Feldman 
President & CEO 
Tori Richard, Ltd. 

Housing Hawai‘i’s Future 
PO Box 3043 
Honolulu, HI 96802-3043 
 
February 6, 2025 
TO: 
Chair Tarnas and members of the House Judiciary & Hawaiian Affairs Committee 
RE: 
SB 740 RELATING TO HOUSING. 
Dear Chair Tarnas and Committee Members, 
Housing Hawai‘i’s Future is a nonprofit dedicated to creating opportunities for 
Hawai‘i’s next generation by ending the workforce housing shortage. 
We support the establishment of the Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) Financing and 
Deed Restriction program through HB 740. 
Local families with existing ADU capacity on their residential lots often lack the 
capital necessary to gain financing for the construction of new housing. We need to 
stimulate ADU construction while generating a new, permanent market of affordable 
workforce housing for residents.  
We support the construction of accessory dwelling units as a strategy for generating 
more affordable housing across Hawai‘i. HB 740 will tangibly operationalize the 
Accessory Dwelling Unit Act of 2024, known also as Act 39, SLH 2024. 
Placing new ADUs under deed restrictions will guarantee that this housing remains 
workforce housing. As HHF concluded in our sixth policy brief, deed restrictions are 
an underutilized mechanism for meeting our housing needs.1  
We are grateful for your careful consideration of HB 740.  
Thank you, 
 
 
 
Lee Wang​
​
​
​
​
​
Perry Arrasmith 
Executive Director​ ​
​
​
​
Director of Policy 
Housing Hawai‘i’s Future​
​
​
​
Housing Hawai‘i’s Future 
lee@hawaiisfuture.org ​
​
​
​
perry@hawaiisfuture.org  
1 Housing Hawai‘i's Future. "Policy Brief #6: Deed Restrictions in Maui County." 2024. 
https://www.hawaiisfuture.org/resources/policy-brief-mau-deed-restrictions. 
hawaiisfuture.org 
 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

 
733 Bishop Street, Suite 1200, Honolulu, HI 96813  |  (808) 545-4300  |  info@cochawaii.org  |  www.cochawaii.org 
 
Testimony to the House Committee on Judiciary & Hawaiian Affairs 
Representative David A. Tarnas, Chair 
Representative Mahina Poepoe, Vice Chair 
 
Thursday, February 6, at 2:00PM 
Conference Room 325 & Videoconference 
RE: HB740 HD1 Relating to Housing 
Aloha e Chair Tarnas, Vice Chair Poepoe, and Members of the Committee:  
My name is Sherry Menor, President and CEO of the Chamber of Commerce Hawaii ("The Chamber"). 
The Chamber supports House Bill 740 HD1 (HB740 HD1), which establishes the Accessory Dwelling Unit 
Financing and Deed Restriction Program to allocate funds to the counties to provide grants to eligible 
homeowners or homebuyers to finance construction costs, development costs, and non-reoccurring 
closing costs associated with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit and purchase deed 
restrictions on such property. 
 
HB740 HD1 aligns with our 2030 Blueprint for Hawaii: An Economic Action Plan, specifically under the 
policy pillar for Business Services. This bill promotes policies that drive economic growth, enhance 
workforce opportunities, and improve the quality of life for Hawaii's residents.  
 
Hawaii’s housing shortage makes it hard for local workers to find affordable homes. This bill creates the 
ADU Financing and Deed Restriction Program, offering grants for ADU construction and allowing 
counties to purchase deed restrictions. These restrictions keep units available for local workers, retirees, 
and individuals with disabilities, while counties enforce compliance. 
 
To maintain affordability, the bill exempts these properties from conveyance taxes, expands the 
dwelling unit revolving fund, and requires six-month minimum leases to prevent short-term rentals. It 
also empowers counties to buy deed restrictions, issue housing bonds, and enforce long-term 
affordability. The Chamber supports this bill for strengthening the workforce, expanding affordable 
housing, and boosting Hawaii’s economy. 
 
The Chamber of Commerce Hawaii is the state’s leading business advocacy organization, dedicated to 
improving Hawaii’s economy and securing Hawaii’s future for growth and opportunity. Our mission is to 
foster a vibrant economic climate. As such, we support initiatives and policies that align with the 2030 
Blueprint for Hawaii that create opportunities to strengthen overall competitiveness, improve the 
quantity and skills of available workforce, diversify the economy, and build greater local wealth.  
 
We respectfully ask to pass House Bill 740 HD1. Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

 
 
 
To advance and promote a healthy economic environment 
for business, advocating for a responsive government and 
quality education, while preserving Maui’s unique  
community characteristics. 
 
 
HEARING BEFORE THE HOUSE COMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY & HAWAIIAN AFFAIRS 
HAWAII STATE CAPITOL, HOUSE CONFERENCE ROOM 325 
Thursday, February 6, 2025 AT 2:00 P.M. 
  
To The Honorable David A. Tarnas, Chair 
The Honorable Mahina Poepoe, Vice Chair 
Members of the Committee on Judiciary & Hawaiian Affairs 
 
 
 
SUPPORT HB740 HD1 RELATING TO HOUSING 
  
The Maui Chamber of Commerce wholeheartedly SUPPORTS HB740 which establishes the Accessory 
Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program to allocate funds to the counties to provide 
grants to eligible homeowners or homebuyers to finance construction costs, development costs, and 
non-reoccurring closing costs associated with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit and 
purchase deed restrictions on such property. 
 
Housing is a top priority for the Maui Chamber of Commerce and continues to be so as the crisis 
escalates following the wildfires and it directly impacts businesses and our economic revitalization. 
Before the wildfires, we needed over 10,000 units by 2025, but that number has only increased as 3% 
of our housing was lost in Lahaina. This is one of the main factors in the ever-increasing pricing of 
housing. 
 
This is another excellent tool in the toolbox for housing. 
 
For these reasons, we SUPPORT HB740 HD1. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Pamela Tumpap 
President 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

HB-740-HD-1 
Submitted on: 2/4/2025 9:52:16 PM 
Testimony for JHA on 2/6/2025 2:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Julyn Beth Mahoe-Garcia 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
                                         Hearing Before Justice and Hawaiian Affairs 
                     Hawaiʻi State Capital, Via Video conference, Conference room 325 
                                                 Thursday February 6, 2025 
                                   In Support of HB740 HD1 Related to Housing 
Aloha Chair Tarnas, Vice Chair Poepoe and committee members, 
    I strongly support the passing of HB740 HD1 relating to housing, as it addresses the current 
housing crisis..  This bill not only addresses the need for accessible and affordable housing in 
Hawaiʻi but the disparities faced by the working people of Hawaiʻi.  From the Mid-1970ʻs many 
Hawaiʻi residents have been relocating from their homeland to the continents due to cost of 
living and housing prices.  According to Hawaiʻi Public Radio, in a 2023 segment, they reported 
that of the 680,000 in the United States, 55% of the population lives outside of Hawaiʻi.   
    The current housing crisis affects many biopsychosocial aspects of the local workers.  Not 
only are local residents forced between survival or comfort but they also experience mental and 
cultural hardships during the transition.  When you ask a local who relocated, you can hear how 
the forced transition caused mental and emotional pain, however living needs were more 
important than everything left behind.   
    From a personal perspective,  I have entertained the thought of relocating after the birth of my 
child.  Cost of living, wages and housing costs made me consider relocating.  I have seen 
families separate for this same reason and I truly believe that relocation should not be the only 
option.  As the Head of Household, for a family of three (3) with four (4) full time incomes, 
home ownership always seems out of reach.  As a social worker, I see how disparities and 
inequality among our Kanaka Maoli can lead to choosing relocation or in some unfavorable 
circumstances they become homeless.   
    For a culture that has been faced by generational injustices, deed restriction programs have the 
potential to ensure that local working people have an opportunity to successfully own a piece of 
their homeland.  As a proud Kanaka Maoli, I strongly support HB740 HD1 for the betterment 
of our people. 

 
