 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
GOVERNOR 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
LT. GOVERNOR 
 
 
 
 
 
DEAN MINAKAMI 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 
 
 
STATE OF HAWAII 
DEPARTMENT OF BUSINESS, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND TOURISM  
HAWAII HOUSING FINANCE AND DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 
677 QUEEN STREET, SUITE 300 
HONOLULU, HAWAII 96813 
FAX: (808) 587-0600 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Statement of 
DEAN MINAKAMI 
Hawaii Housing Finance and Development Corporation 
Before the 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON HOUSING 
March 11, 2025 at 1:10 p.m. 
State Capitol, Room 225 
In consideration of 
H.B. 740 HD2 
RELATING TO HOUSING 
Chair Chang, Vice Chair Hashimoto, and members of the Committee.   
HHFDC supports HB 740 HD2, which establishes the Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) 
Financing and Deed Restriction Program to allocate funds to the counties to provide 
grants to eligible homeowners or homebuyers to finance construction costs, 
development costs, and non-reoccurring closing costs associated with the construction 
of an ADU and purchase deed restrictions on such property.  
The upfront costs of designing and permitting an ADU are barriers for many 
homeowners. HHFDC supports the ADU Financing and Deed Restriction program as a 
way to increase the inventory of rental units in the State.  In addition, the deed 
restriction program will create an inventory of homes for local residents, stabilize home 
prices, and reduce speculation in our housing market.   
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this bill. 

  
  
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF HB740 HD2 
RELATING TO HOUSING  
Senate Committee on Housing  
  
March 11th, 2025                             1:10 p.m.                                       Room 225                       
  
Aloha e Chair Chang, Vice Chair Hashimoto, members of the committee:  
 
The Office of Hawaiian Affairs (OHA) submits this testimony in SUPPORT of HB740 HD2, which 
would establish an accessory dwelling unit (ADU) financing and deed restriction program under the 
Hawai’i Housing Finance and Development Corporation (HHFDC). 
This inventive measure will provide funding for counties to assist eligible homeowners or 
homebuyers with financing the construction of accessory dwelling units (ADUs) by purchasing equity in 
their properties. In exchange, the homeowner must agree to place a deed restriction on their property in 
perpetuity to ensure the unit is occupied by . ADUs create a wide range of housing options and can 
increase housing affordability for homeowners and tenants. This bill helps with addressing the housing 
crisis in Hawai’i where more than 50% of households spend more than 30% of their income on rent.1 
Furthermore, this bill supports community needs within each county. The deed restriction 
requires the property be occupied by an owner or lessee that works at minimum 30 hrs. at a qualifying 
business. This ensures that housing stock of AUDS are made for local workforce in respected areas. 
Also, prevents homes from being sold to non-resident buyers or used as short-term vacation rentals. The 
program will preserve affordability for Kama‘aina and protect property value to ensure it remains 
attainable and accessible to Hawai’i residents as primary residences. It seeks to prioritize kama’aina 
housing needs and is an investment in local communities, a sustainable economy, and future 
generations of kama’aina.  
This initiative is in line with OHA’s mission to improve the conditions of Native Hawaiians and 
ensure their equitable access to housing, education, healthcare, and economic opportunities. It reflects 
our commitment to advancing the well-being of our beneficiaries and the broader community.   
 
OHA appreciates the opportunity to share our manaʻo and urges the Legislature to PASS HB740 
HD2. Mahalo nui loa.  
 
 
 
 
1 1 University of Hawaiʻi Economic Research Organization. (2024). Hawaiʻi housing factbook 2024. Last accessed 
030925,https://uhero.hawaii.edu/wp-content/uploads/2024/05/HawaiiHousingFactbook2024.pdf 

 
 
 
 
JOSH GREEN M.D. 
GOVERNOR 
 
SYLVIA LUKE 
LT. GOVERNOR 
STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
DEPARTMENT OF TAXATION 
Ka ‘Oihana ‘Auhau 
P.O. BOX 259 
HONOLULU, HAWAI‘I 96809 
PHONE NO: (808) 587-1540 
FAX NO: (808) 587-1560 
GARY S. SUGANUMA 
DIRECTOR  
 
KRISTEN M.R. SAKAMOTO 
DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF 
GARY S. SUGANUMA, DIRECTOR OF TAXATION 
 
 
TESTIMONY ON THE FOLLOWING MEASURE: 
H.B. No. 740, H.D. 2, Relating to Housing. 
 
BEFORE THE: 
Senate Committee on Housing 
 
 
DATE: 
 
Tuesday, March 11, 2025 
TIME:  
 
1:10 p.m. 
LOCATION:  
State Capitol, Room 225 
 
 
Chair Chang, Vice-Chair Hashimoto, and Members of the Committee: 
 
The Department of Taxation (DOTAX) offers the following comments regarding 
H.B. 740, H.D. 2, for your consideration. 
 
Section 6 of H.B. 740, H.D. 2, amends section 247-3, Hawaii Revised Statutes 
(HRS), to exempt from conveyance tax any property with a county-owned deed 
restriction according to the new provisions under chapter 201H, HRS, in this bill.  
Section 6 also exempts any document or instrument conveying a county-owned deed 
restriction. 
 
The measure has a defective effective date of July 1, 3000. 
 
DOTAX requests that if this bill is passed, section 6 take effect on January 1, 
2026, to allow for form and instruction changes necessary to implement the proposed 
conveyance tax exemption. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments on this measure.  

Council Chair 
Director of Council Services 
  Alice L. Lee 
David M. Raatz, Jr., Esq. 
 
Vice-Chair 
Deputy Director of Council Services 
  Yuki Lei K. Sugimura 
Richelle K. Kawasaki, Esq. 
 
Presiding Officer Pro Tempore 
  Tasha Kama 
 
Councilmembers 
  Tom Cook 
  Gabe Johnson 
  Tamara Paltin 
  Keani N.W. Rawlins-Fernandez 
  Shane M. Sinenci 
  Nohelani U‘u-Hodgins 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTY COUNCIL 
COUNTY OF MAUI 
200 S. HIGH STREET 
WAILUKU, MAUI, HAWAII  96793 
www.MauiCounty.us 
 
March 10, 2025 
 
TO: 
The Honorable Stanley Chang, Chair 
 
Senate Committee on Housing 
FROM: 
Alice L. Lee 
 
Council Chair 
SUBJECT: HEARING OF MARCH 11, 2025; TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF HB740, 
HD2, RELATING TO HOUSING 
 
I support this measure to establish an Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) Financing and 
Deed Restriction Program under the Hawaiʻi Housing Finance and Development 
Corporation. 
The Maui County Council has not had the opportunity to take a formal position on this 
measure.  Therefore, I am providing this testimony in my capacity as an individual 
member of the Maui County Council. 
I support this measure for the following reasons: 
1. 
By reducing financial barriers to ADU construction, this bill encourages 
homeowners to develop additional housing units on their properties. These 
units can provide long-term rental options for local families, kūpuna, and 
workforce members who are struggling to find stable housing. 
2. 
The voluntary deed restriction program helps prevent ADUs from being 
used for short-term rentals or speculative resale. By preserving these units 
for local residents, this bill ensures that the benefits of increased housing 
stock remain within the community for generations to come. 
3. 
Instead of requiring counties to apply for individual grants, this bill 
streamlines the process by allocating an annual lump sum, allowing 
counties to effectively plan, administer, and distribute resources to 
homeowners based on their specific housing needs. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
 
ocs:proj:legis:25legis:25testimony:hb740hd2_paf25-007(35)_emb 

OFFICE o|=_ H_OU_S|NG
KE KE‘ENA HO‘OLALA KUKULA HALE
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU
530 SOUTH KING STREET, ROOM 306 ' HONOLULU, HAWA|‘| 96813
PHONE; (808) 768-4675 ' FAX; (808) 768-4242 - WEBSITE1 www.honolulu.gov/housing
' “wryO *
°r-
41°
R'CK |a:A§'ég'ARD'
1
KEVIN AUGER
ME/A
7-
' -0‘
'_
-I
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
F'O‘O HO'OKO
c1-,.
-
n10
.
5
'."a _
;
.
e 1. (L;
~
-'
>~*
I
)
IQII
.
"Ior
March 10, 2025
2°25‘“°”'°‘°’5
The Honorable Stanley Chang, Chair
The Honorable Troy N. Hashimoto, Vice Chair
and Members of the Senate Committee on Housing
Hawai‘i State Capitol
415 South Beretania Street
Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96813
Dear Chair Chang, Vice Chair Hashimoto, and Committee Members:
SUBJECT: Testimony Supporting the Intent of HB740 HD2 — Relating to Housing
Hearing: Tues., Mar. 11, 2025, 1:10 p.m. at the State Capitol, Rm. 225
The Office of Housing supports the intent of HB740 HD2 that would establish the
Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program to incentivize the development
of Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs). This bill would enable the Hawai‘i Housing Finance and
Development Corporation (HHFDC) to allocate funds from the Dwelling Unit Revolving Fund
(DURF) to the counties for the purposes of: 1) providing grants to homeowners to support the
development of ADUs, and; 2) for the counties to purchase and own deed restrictions on eligible
properties with a primary dwelling unit and ADU.
ADUs can help to increase our supply of lower-cost housing, but there are many barriers for
interested homeowners, including high construction costs, financing challenges for unit
construction, and infrastructure insufficiencies. While the City's ADU Ordinance was adopted in
2015 and various exemptions have been extended to homeowners for the creation of these units,
these barriers have mitigated against the designed stimulation of ADU development.
While the City supports this innovative proposal to increase housing inventory, we have
concerns about capacity challenges, lack of positions and staff, potential impacts to real property
tax revenues, eligibility criteria, implementation timelines, enforceability, and potential liability
associated with the bill in its current form.
HB740 HD2 requires that counties be responsible for administering, validating evidence,
and ensuring compliance with the program. While it also allows the counties to establish and
collect fees and premiums to cover these costs, there is no dedicated funding source to establish
and stand-up full-time equivalent (FTE) positions to administer, train staff, and enforce the
program, or meet the annual reporting requirements that will continue for the length of recorded
deed restrictions, potentially into perpetuity, even if program funding is terminated at some point in
the future.

The Honorable Stanley Chang, Chair
The Honorable Troy N. Hashimoto, Vice Chair
and Members of the Senate Committee on Housing
Hawai‘i State Capitol
March 10, 2025
Page 2
The City and County of Honolulu does not currently have the capacity to administer this
program, and the bill’s language is unclear if a portion of the DURF funds provided to the counties
could be used for administrative funding purposes. Additionally, the City is not currently in the
business of purchasing and owning deed restrictions as this process usually is conducted by an
applicant or homebuyer directly through the Hawai‘i State Bureau of Conveyances. lf the City was
to take on this responsibility, we would need appropriate funding and time to either onboard new
staff with the required expertise, train new and existing staff, or contract out to a third-party entity.
The time and skill required to negotiate the price of a deed restriction on a case-by-case basis
alone would require extensive costs and may require clarification that these purchases are in the
public interest, despite being exempt from the procurement process.
Furthermore, the bill requires that eligible homeowners or buyers indicate their capability to
properly use the grant; however, no criteria for this evaluation has been established. The lack of an
AMI requirement raises concerns about whether this program will indeed increase the supply of
“affordable” housing in the State. The absence of a restriction on short-term rentals may make this
program ripe for abuse, and the ambiguous restriction on the funds preventing its use for purposes
of “entertainment or perquisites” are questionably ambiguous. If the evaluation process criteria and
the responsibility for cleaning up vague terms are left to the individual counties to determine, we
would not only see a further delay through the administrative rules public hearing process while
these criteria are established, but also potentially allow inconsistent policies throughout the state.
Finally, the bill creates an immunity for State officers, employees, and agents. However, it
leaves out county officers, employees, and agents. If the bill continues to insist that the counties
administer the program, county officers, employees, and agents should be provided the same
statutory protections.
Given these concerns, if this measure is to move forward, we request these issues be
addressed as the discussions continue. Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
Sincerely
Kevin D. Auger
Executive Director
APPROVED:
Michael D. Formby, Managing Director
Office of the Managing Director



 
 
 
 
Testimony of the Hawai‘i Appleseed Center for Law and Economic Justice 
Support for HB 740 HD2 – Relating to Housing 
Senate Committee on Housing 
Tuesday, March 11, 2025 at 1:10PM | Conf. Rm. 225  and via Videoconference 
 
Aloha Chair Chang, Vice Chair Hashimotoi, and Members of the Committee: 
Mahalo for the opportunity to testify in strong support of HB740 HD2, which would establish an 
Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) Financing and Deed Restriction Program. 
This innovative legislation addresses two critical challenges facing our communities: the severe 
shortage of affordable housing causing an increase in cost burdened households and the 
subsequent displacement of local families. By providing grants for ADU construction while 
ensuring long-term affordability through deed restrictions, this bill offers a practical solution that 
could create immediate housing opportunities while preserving them for Hawaii's workforce. 
Approximately 56% of households across the state are rent-burdened, that is spending more 
than 30% of their income on rent1 
Additionally, this bill addresses concerns which were expressed by community members after 
the passing of Act 39 by providing financial means for our local homeowners to participate in 
and contribute to addressing our housing shortage as well as making Hawaii a place where 
residents can remain. 
We strongly support this measure for several key reasons: 
Addresses Financial Barriers: Estimates for ADU construction in Hawaii is about 
$250-$350 per square feet2. Many homeowners who wish to build ADUs to help address 
our housing crisis face significant financial barriers. The grant program will make it 
possible for more moderate-income homeowners to participate in creating housing 
solutions. 
Protects Local Workforce: The deed restriction requirements ensuring occupancy by 
local workers, maintaining employment within the county, demonstrate a thoughtful 
approach to preserving housing for Hawaii's working families. This helps prevent the 
conversion of these units to vacation rentals or investment properties and help establish 
a locals only market. 
Creates Sustainable Solutions: The perpetual deed restrictions ensure that these 
housing units will remain available for local workers and residents for generations to 
2 
https://www.talbuilders.com/adu/#:~:text=How%20Much%20Do%20ADUs%20Cost,to%20$350%20per%
20square%20foot.  
1 https://uhero.hawaii.edu/wp-content/uploads/2024/05/HawaiiHousingFactbook2024.pdf  

 
 
 
 
Testimony of the Hawai‘i Appleseed Center for Law and Economic Justice 
Support for HB 740 HD2 – Relating to Housing 
Senate Committee on Housing 
Tuesday, March 11, 2025 at 1:10PM | Conf. Rm. 225  and via Videoconference 
 
come, creating a lasting legacy of workforce housing that grows over time as more 
homeowners participate in the program. 
Empowers Residents to Actively Contribute: This program enables resident 
homeowners to play an active role in addressing Hawaii's housing challenges, 
empowering them to become part of the solution and directly contribute to building a 
stronger, more sustainable community. 
The bill also includes important accountability measures, such as annual reporting requirements 
and clear qualification criteria for both property owners and tenants. These provisions help 
ensure the program serves its intended purpose while remaining transparent and accountable to 
the public. 
Aligned with Hawaii Appleseed’s mission to promote social and economic justice, we view this 
program as an essential tool for tackling Hawaii's housing crisis while helping working 
families stay rooted in their communities. By pairing financial assistance with long-term 
affordability requirements, the program strikes a thoughtful balance that benefits both present 
and future generations. 
We respectfully urge your committee to pass HB 740 HD2. This legislation represents a 
significant step forward in creating sustainable, community-based solutions to our housing 
challenges while protecting opportunities for local working families and establishing a true 
“locals only” housing market. 
Mahalo for the opportunity to testify on this measure. 
Sincerely, 
Arjuna Heim 
Director of Housing Policy 

 
Hawai‘i YIMBY 
Honolulu, HI 96814 
hawaiiyimby.org 
info@hawaiiyimby.org 
 
March 11, 2025 
Senate Committee on Housing 
Hawai‘i State Capitol 
Honolulu, HI 96813 
 
RE: SUPPORT for HB 740 HD2 - RELATING TO HOUSING 
 
Aloha Chair Chang, Vice Chair Hashimoto, and Members of the Committee, 
 
On behalf of Hawai‘i YIMBY, we are writing in support of HB 740 HD2 which would 
establish the Additional Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program, funding 
and allowing counties to purchase voluntary deed restrictions from eligible homeowners 
and homebuyers. Those eligible may use the funds towards the cost of constructing an 
ADU. ADUs are an important type of housing that adds gentle density to existing, 
established neighborhoods. ADUs can house a young professional, a retired grandparent, 
or many other members of the community. However, many homeowners lack the money 
to build an ADU, despite having the willingness and space. 
We believe in fixing incentives, and this includes creating innovative and targeted 
incentives. Hawai‘i homebuyers continue to struggle to compete with non-Hawai‘i buyers 
both because of lack of funds and a non-dedicated housing stock. This innovative 
incentive will let counties purchase voluntary deed restrictions that require the 
owner-occupant and/or renters be recently retired from or is a full time employee of a 
Hawai‘i business, with appropriate protections for those experiencing involuntary 
unemployment or disability. In the long-term, more homeowners would volunteer for the 
deed restriction and build ADUs. This will create a stock of homes dedicated to those who 
work and live in Hawai‘i. 
1 

 
Hawai‘i YIMBY 
Honolulu, HI 96814 
hawaiiyimby.org 
info@hawaiiyimby.org 
 
This alone will not solve the housing crisis, however, it will increase our overall supply of 
housing. Although small, building ADUs on plots of land that previously only had one unit, 
increasing the number of units on that same plot to two or three, is a much more efficient 
and affordable use of space. 
Hawai‘i YIMBY (Yes In My Backyard) is a volunteer-led grassroots advocacy organization 
dedicated to supporting bold and effective solutions for Hawai‘i’s devastating housing 
crisis. Our members are deeply concerned about Hawai‘i’s chronic and worsening housing 
shortage, which has caused home prices to rise much faster than incomes and pushes 
thousands of kamaʻāina out to the mainland or into homelessness every single year. 
We ask your support for this bill. Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
 
Sincerely, 
Damien Waikoloa 
Chapter Lead, Hawai‘i YIMBY 
 
Edgardo Díaz Vega 
Chapter Lead, Hawai‘i YIMBY 
 
 
2 

Housing Hawai‘i’s Future 
PO Box 3043 
Honolulu, HI 96802-3043 
 
March 11, 2025 
TO: 
Chair Chang and members of the Senate Committee on Housing 
RE: 
SB 740, HD2 RELATING TO HOUSING. 
Dear Chair Chang and Committee Members, 
Housing Hawai‘i’s Future is a nonprofit dedicated to creating opportunities for 
Hawai‘i’s next generation by ending the workforce housing shortage. 
We support the establishment of the Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) Financing and 
Deed Restriction program through HB 740, HD2. 
Local families with existing ADU capacity on their residential lots often lack the 
capital necessary to gain financing for the construction of new housing. We need to 
stimulate ADU construction while generating a new, permanent market of affordable 
workforce housing for residents.  
We support the construction of accessory dwelling units as a strategy for generating 
more affordable housing across Hawai‘i. HB 740 will tangibly operationalize the 
Accessory Dwelling Unit Act of 2024, also known as Act 39, SLH 2024. 
Placing new ADUs under deed restrictions will guarantee that this housing remains 
workforce housing. As HHF concluded in our sixth policy brief, deed restrictions are 
an underutilized mechanism for meeting our housing needs.1  
We are grateful for your careful consideration of HB 740, HD2.  
Thank you, 
 
 
 
Lee Wang​
​
​
​
​
​
Perry Arrasmith 
Executive Director​ ​
​
​
​
Director of Policy 
Housing Hawai‘i’s Future​
​
​
​
Housing Hawai‘i’s Future 
lee@hawaiisfuture.org ​
​
​
​
perry@hawaiisfuture.org  
1 Housing Hawai‘i's Future. "Policy Brief #6: Deed Restrictions in Maui County." 2024. 
https://www.hawaiisfuture.org/resources/policy-brief-mau-deed-restrictions. 
hawaiisfuture.org 
 
 	

 
 
PO Box 23198 • Honolulu, HI 96823 • 808-531-5502 
speaks.hawaii-can.org • info@hcanspeaks.org 
Hawai‘i Children's Action Network Speaks! is a nonpartisan 501c4 nonprofit committed to advocating 
for children and their families.  Our core issues are safety, health, and education. 
To: 
Senator Stanley Chang, Chair 
 
 
Senator Troy N. Hashimoto, Vice Chair 
 
 
Senate Committee on Housing 
 
From: 
 
Chevelle Davis, MPH - Director of Early Childhood & Health Policy 
 
 
Hawai‘i Children’s Action Network Speaks! 
 
Subject:  
Measure H.B. No. 740 H.D. 2 – Relating to Housing 
 
Hearing:   
Tuesday, March 11, 2025, at 1:10 PM, Conference Room 225 
 
POSITION:  
STRONG SUPPORT  
 
Aloha e Chair Chang, Vice Chair Hashimoto, and Members of the Committee,  
Mahalo for the opportunity to testify in STRONG SUPPORT of H.B. No. 740 H.D. 2, which would 
establish an Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) Financing and Deed Restriction Program. This bill 
presents a crucial opportunity to support Hawai‘i’s working families and children by addressing 
one of the biggest barriers they face—affordable housing. 
Hawai‘i families are struggling to remain in their communities as rising housing costs push them 
out. More than half of renters statewide are cost-burdened, spending over 30% of their income 
on rent, leaving less for necessities like food, healthcare, and childcare. The lack of affordable 
housing directly affects children’s stability, education, and well-being. H.B. No. 740 H.D. 2 offers 
a practical solution to create more affordable homes while ensuring they remain available for 
local working families for generations to come. 
We strongly support this measure for several reasons: 
Keeps Families Together – Too many parents must consider leaving Hawai‘i to find housing they 
can afford. By making it easier for homeowners to build ADUs and ensuring these units remain 
affordable for local working families, this bill helps keep families together, ensuring that children 
can grow up with extended family support and stability. 
Provides Relief for Working Parents – The high cost of housing forces many parents to work 
multiple jobs, reducing the time they can spend with their children. By increasing access to 
affordable rental units, this program helps relieve financial stress so parents can focus on their 
families rather than just making ends meet. 
Supports Local Workforce Stability – The deed restrictions ensure that these ADUs serve local 
workers, not vacation rentals or outside investors. This means more teachers, healthcare 

PO Box 23198 • Honolulu, HI 96823 • 808-531-5502 
speaks.hawaii-can.org • info@hcanspeaks.org 
 
workers, and service industry employees—many of whom are parents—can afford to live near 
their workplaces, benefiting the entire community. 
Creates Long-Term Housing Solutions – With built-in affordability protections, this program 
ensures that the homes created today will still be there for Hawai‘i’s keiki in the future. By making 
housing a permanent resource for working families, we are investing in children’s futures and 
helping break the cycle of housing insecurity. 
This program also includes important accountability measures, ensuring that financial assistance 
is used as intended and that homeowners and tenants meet the necessary criteria. By prioritizing 
working families, H.B. No. 740 H.D. 2 aligns with our mission to ensure that all keiki in Hawai‘i 
have the opportunity to thrive in stable, supportive communities. 
We urge the committee to pass this bill, which would be a significant step toward making Hawai‘i 
a place where working families can afford to stay, grow, and succeed. 
Mahalo for the opportunity to testify on this critical measure. 
 

 
 
 
To advance and promote a healthy economic environment 
for business, advocating for a responsive government and 
quality education, while preserving Maui’s unique  
community characteristics. 
 
 
HEARING BEFORE THE SENATE COMMITTEE ON HOUSING 
HAWAII STATE CAPITOL, SENATE CONFERENCE ROOM 225 
Tuesday, March 11, 2025, 1:10 P.M. 
  
To The Honorable Senator Stanley Chang, Chair 
The Honorable Senator Troy N. Hashimoto, Vice Chair 
Members of the committee on Housing 
 
 
 
SUPPORT HB740 HD2 RELATING TO HOUSING 
  
The Maui Chamber of Commerce wholeheartedly SUPPORTS HB740 HD2 which establishes the 
Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program to allocate funds to the counties to 
provide grants to eligible homeowners or homebuyers to finance construction costs, development 
costs, and non-reoccurring closing costs associated with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit 
and purchase deed restrictions on such property. 
 
Housing is a top priority for the Maui Chamber of Commerce and continues to be so as the crisis 
escalates following the wildfires and it directly impacts businesses and our economic revitalization. 
Before the wildfires, we needed over 10,000 units by 2025, but that number has only increased as 3% 
of our housing was lost in Lahaina. This is one of the main factors in the ever-increasing pricing of 
housing. 
 
This is another excellent tool in the toolbox for housing. 
 
For these reasons, we SUPPORT HB740 HD2. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Pamela Tumpap 
President 

 
    C L A R E N C E  T .  C .  C H I N G  C A M P U S   1 8 2 2  K e ‘ e a u m o k u  S t r e e t ,  H o n o l u l u ,  H I  9 6 8 2 2  
    P h o n e  ( 8 0 8 ) 5 2 7 - 4 8 1 3    
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF HB 740 HD2:  RELATING TO HOUSING 
 
TO:  
Senate Committee on Housing 
 
FROM: 
Tina Andrade, President and CEO, Catholic Charities Hawai`i 
 
Hearing: 
Tuesday, 3/11/25; 1:10 pm; CR 225& via Videoconference 
 
Chair Chang, Vice Chair Hashimoto, and Members, Committee on Housing: 
 
Catholic Charities Hawai`i supports HB 740 HD2, which establishes the Accessory 
Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program.  It allocates funds to the 
counties for grants to eligible homeowners/homebuyers to develop accessory dwelling 
units and to purchase deed restrictions on these properties. 
 
Catholic Charities Hawai`i (CCH) is a tax exempt, community-based organization that 
has been providing social services in Hawai`i for over 77 years.  CCH has programs 
serving elders, veterans, children, families, homeless and immigrants.  Our mission is to 
provide services and advocacy to the most vulnerable of the people in Hawai`i.  We 
assist over 40,000 people annually across the state and have a long history of 
addressing affordable housing and homelessness.     
 
Hawai`i is in critical need of more housing for our local residents, as soon as possible. 
Accessory dwelling units (ADUs) offer a faster and more effective solution to increase 
housing supply while ensuring these homes remain accessible to local residents, 
especially our workforce. 
Numerous studies show that a significant percentage of Hawai‘i’s workforce is 
considering leaving due to the severe housing shortage, which continues to drive up 
rents.  Assisting property owners to build an ADU, on their own land, can provide more 
options in our housing tool box.  This initiative could bring much-needed relief to our 
local workforce. 
Implementing deed restrictions on these units will ensure they remain available to local 
workers. We strongly support the Legislature’s efforts to clarify any constitutional 
concerns regarding these deed restrictions, ensuring that government-assisted ADUs 
are prioritized for bona fide Hawai‘i residents, including kūpuna and individuals with 
disabilities. 
Catholic Charities Hawai`i urges your support of this bill.   
 
If you have any questions, please contact our Legislative Liaison, Betty Lou Larson, at 
(808) 527-4813.  

 
 
Council for Native Hawaiian Advancement 
91-1270 Kinoiki St., Bldg. 1 
Kapolei, HI 96707 
 
Hawai‘i State Senate Committee on Housing 
HB740 – Relating to Housing 
 
RE: Strong support of HB740 
                March 11, 2025 
 
The Council for Native Hawaiian Advancement (CNHA) writes in strong support of HB740. This bill is 
critical to mitigating the ongoing and worsening impacts of the rising cost of living that make it difficult 
for working local and Native Hawaiian residents to secure attainable housing.  
 
The average price of a home in Hawai‘i has now surpassed $800,000. As a result, Native Hawaiians are 
forced to seek affordable housing out of state, leading to more Native Hawaiians residing outside of 
Hawai‘i than within. Since 1984, existing home prices have increased by 155%, while Hawai‘i's median 
household income has risen only 24%. High housing prices disproportionately impact our working families 
and young people, prospective homeowners who find it nearly impossible to build a future here in Hawai‘i. 
According to DBEDT’s 2024 report on Demographic, Social, and Economic Characteristics of Hawai‘i’s Race 
Grouos, around 62 percent of Native Hawaiians in Hawai‘i are employed, yet they earn significantly less 
than other major race groups in the state, with medium annual earnings falling below $40,000 for full-
time, year-round work.  
 
HB740 creates innovative housing solutions that prioritize residents first and foremost. By reducing 
financial barriers to ADU construction, this bill encourages homeowners to develop additional housing 
units on their properties. These units can provide long-term rental options for local families, kūpuna, and 
workforce members who are struggling to find stable housing. In coupling financing with voluntary deed 
restriction, this bill helps to prevent ADUs from being used for short-term rentals or speculative resale. By 
preserving these units for local residents, this bill ensures that the benefits of increased housing stock 
remain within the community for generations to come. 
 
This measure establishes housing solutions to keep Hawai‘i affordable for its local residents. Prioritizing 
initiatives to address inequalities in housing accessibility creates economic stability for Hawai’i’s 
workforce and fosters community development for future generations residing in Hawai’i. For these 
reasons, we humbly ask that you PASS HB740.  
 
Me ka haʻahaʻa,  
 
 
 
 
Madelyn McKeague 
Director of Advocacy, CNHA  

HB-740-HD-2 
Submitted on: 3/10/2025 5:33:03 PM 
Testimony for HOU on 3/11/2025 1:10:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Doris Matsunaga 
Testifying for Save 
Medicaid Hawaii  
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Save Medicaid Hawaii supports HB740 HD2 
 
 	

 
 
TO:  
 
SENATE COMMITTEE ON HOUSING  
The Honorable Senator Stanley Chang, Chair  
The Honorable Senator Troy N. Hashimoto, Vice Chair, and  
Members of the Committee 
  
FROM:  
Micah A. Kāne, CEO & President  
   
RE:  
Testimony in Support for HB 740 HD2, Relating to Housing 
DATE:   
Tuesday, March 11, 2025 at 1:10pm 
PLACE: 
Conference Room 225 
 
 
The Hawaiʻi Community Foundation (HCF) supports HB 740 HD2, Relating to Housing, which 
establishes the Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program. 
 
Housing is a priority area within HCF’s CHANGE Framework under the “C” sector of 
Community Centered Economy. Per UHERO, “median housing costs in Hawaii are more than 
2.7 times the national level” 1  and median rents are the highest in the country.2  ALICE 
families are more vulnerable because of our current housing market. 
   
The demand for attainable local housing currently enveloping Hawaiʻi is at crisis levels. Too 
many people who do not live or work in Hawai‘i are owning and driving up the costs of our 
housing market, which contributes to a record outmigration of local residents. The agony of 
this dynamic punctuated by the fact that more Hawaiians now live out of Hawaiʻi than in 
Hawaiʻi.   
 
While eƯorts to improve housing have shown progress, it is evident that the current 
perspectives and eƯorts need to be expanded, and new creative solutions must be adopted. 
Hyper prioritization of major oƯ-site infrastructure improvements that can eƯectuate 
housing, broad-based collaboration and regulatory reform are more critical now than ever.   
 
We support the creation of the Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction 
Program. The program envisioned by this bill can simultaneously stimulate an increase of our 
housing supply while also dedicating units to be used for local workforce housing. 
 
 
1 UHERO 2023 Hawaii Housing Factbook at page 1. 
2 UHERO 2024 Hawaii Housing Factbook at page 6. 

 
 
Kamaʻāina want to stay in Hawaiʻi and HB 740 HD2 can open that door and provide that 
hope. There is universal agreement that locals need more places to call home. Homes must 
be aƯordable so residents will be free from the pressure of leaving the island. HB 740 HD2 is 
another solution that contributes to more housing for our community. HCF supports this bill. 

 
733 Bishop Street, Suite 1200, Honolulu, HI 96813  |  (808) 545-4300  |  info@cochawaii.org  |  www.cochawaii.org 
 
Testimony to the Senate Committee on Housing 
Senator Stanley Chang, Chair 
Senator Troy N. Hashimoto, Vice Chair 
 
Tuesday, March 11, at 1:10PM 
Conference Room 225 & Videoconference 
RE: HB740 HD2 Relating to Housing 
Aloha e Chair Chang, Vice Chair Hashimoto, and Members of the Committee:  
My name is Sherry Menor, President and CEO of the Chamber of Commerce Hawaii ("The 
Chamber"). The Chamber supports House Bill 740 House Draft 2 (HB740 HD2), which 
Establishes the Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program to allocate 
funds to the counties to provide grants to eligible homeowners or homebuyers to finance 
construction costs, development costs, and non-reoccurring closing costs associated with the 
construction of an accessory dwelling unit and purchase deed restrictions on such property. 
 
HB740 HD2 aligns with our 2030 Blueprint for Hawaii: An Economic Action Plan, specifically 
under the policy pillar for Business Services. This bill promotes policies that drive economic 
growth, enhance workforce opportunities, and improve the quality of life for Hawaii's residents.  
 
There is an urgent need to expand affordable housing while ensuring that local workers in 
Hawaii have secure homes. To address this, the measure establishes an accessory dwelling 
unit financing and deed restriction program under the Hawaii Housing Finance and 
Development Corporation. The program offers grants to eligible homeowners or homebuyers to 
finance the construction and associated development costs of accessory dwelling units, while 
also enabling counties to purchase deed restrictions that ensure these properties remain 
affordable and occupied by local residents.  
 
The measure also amends existing statutes to enhance county powers in facilitating affordable 
housing through loan programs, revolving funds, and tax exemptions, while setting strict 
compliance and reporting obligations for properties with deed restrictions. By integrating 
financial assistance with regulatory oversight, it ensures that funds are used effectively to 
promote sustainable housing development and protect local occupancy standards. The 
Chamber supports this initiative because it will significantly boost affordable housing 
opportunities, preserve community integrity, and secure homes for Hawaii’s hardworking 
residents. 
 
The Chamber of Commerce Hawaii is the state’s leading business advocacy organization, 
dedicated to improving Hawaii’s economy and securing Hawaii’s future for growth and 
opportunity. Our mission is to foster a vibrant economic climate. As such, we support initiatives 
and policies that align with the 2030 Blueprint for Hawaii that create opportunities to strengthen 
overall competitiveness, improve the quantity and skills of available workforce, diversify the 
economy, and build greater local wealth.  
 
We respectfully ask to pass House Bill 740 House Draft 2. Thank you for the opportunity to 
testify. 

 
REALTOR® is a registered collective membership mark which may be used only by real estate professionals 
who are members of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS® and subscribe to its strict Code of Ethics. 
 
808-733-7060    
    1259 A‘ala Street, Suite 300 
        
 
                 Honolulu, HI 96817 
808-737-4977  
 
March 11, 2025 
 
The Honorable Stanley Chang, Chair 
Senate Committee on Housing 
State Capitol, Conference Room 225 & Videoconference 
 
RE: House Bill 740, HD2, Relating to Housing 
 
HEARING: Tuesday, March 11, 2025, at 1:10 p.m. 
 
 
Aloha Chair Chang, Vice Chair Hashimoto, and Members of the Committee: 
 
My name is Lyndsey Garcia, Director of Advocacy, testifying on behalf of the 
Hawai‘i Association of REALTORS® (“HAR”), the voice of real estate in Hawaii and its 
over 10,000 members. HAR provides comments on House Bill 740, HD2, which 
establishes the Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed Restriction Program to 
allocate funds to the counties to provide grants to eligible homeowners or homebuyers 
to finance construction costs, development costs, and non-reoccurring closing costs 
associated with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit and purchase deed 
restrictions on such property.  Effective 7/1/3000 
 
Hawai‘i REALTORS® supports the creation of accessory dwelling units to help 
increase the supply of housing and help address Hawaii’s housing challenges. We do 
however have concerns that the deed restrictions contained in this measure are in 
perpetuity. Having deed restrictions on a property in perpetuity can be problematic 
especially in land use planning, as communities can change and uses for a property 
may need to change as well over time. We respectfully suggest that the deed 
restrictions be amortized over 10 years but are open to other proposals for alternative 
timeframes. We look forward to further discussions on this matter. 
 
Mahalo for the opportunity to provide testimony on this measure. 
 

 
OUR MISSION 
To support and advance public policies 
that make Hawai‘i affordable for all 
working families. 
OUR VISION 
Collaborative, sustainable, and 
evidence-based public policies that 
create a diverse and sustainable 
Hawai‘i economy, an abundance of 
quality job opportunities, and a future 
where all working families living in 
Hawai‘i can thrive. 
BOARD MEMBERS 
Jason Fujimoto 
Meli James, Board Chair 
Micah Kāne 
Brandon Kurisu 
Brad Nicolai 
Mike Pietsch 
Sunshine Topping 
ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
Josh Feldman 
Brittany Heyd 
Alicia Moy 
Ed Schultz 
Josh Wisch 
President & Executive Director 
827 Fort Street Mall, 2nd Floor 
Honolulu, Hawai‘i 96813 
+1 (808) 542-4089 
info@holomuacollaborative.org 
HolomuaCollaborative.org 
Page 1 of 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Committee:  
 
Senate Committee on Housing 
Bill Number:  
 
HB 740 HD2, Relating to Housing 
Hearing Date and Time: March 11, 2025, 1:10pm (Room 225) 
Re: 
 
 
Testimony of Holomua Collaborative – Comments  
 
Aloha Chair Chang, Vice Chair Hashimoto, and members of the committee: 
 
Mahalo for hearing HB740 HD2, Relating to Housing, and for the opportunity to submit 
testimony offering comments on this bill.   
 
Holomua Collaborative believes that deed restrictions are a useful tool to help secure 
long-term workforce housing that will help keep local families in Hawai‘i, and that HB 
739 HD2 and HB740 HD2 can help serve that purpose.  
 
In the event that the Committee is inclined to only move a single deed restriction 
vehicle at this point in the legislative session, Holomua Collaborative respectfully 
requests that this Committee move HB 739 HD2 and defer HB 740 HD2. Like this 
measure, HB 739 HD2 allows for program funding to be used for ADU construction 
costs, while also allowing for the funding for other uses critical to help local families 
and our housing market, such as the down payment on first home, cesspool 
conversion, and infrastructure repair and remodel. 
 
Mahalo for your consideration. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Joshua Wisch 
President & Executive Director 
 	

L E G I S L A T I V E    T A X    B I L L    S E R V I C E 
TAX FOUNDATION OF HAWAII 
735 Bishop Street, Suite 417 
 
Honolulu, Hawaii 96813  Tel. 536-4587 
 
 
SUBJECT:  CONVEYANCE; Accessory Dwelling Units; Grants; Voluntary Deed Restrictions; 
Dwelling Unit Revolving Fund 
BILL NUMBER: HB 740 HD 2 
INTRODUCED BY: House Committee on Finance 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: Establishes the Accessory Dwelling Unit Financing and Deed 
Restriction Program to allocate funds to the counties to provide grants to eligible homeowners or 
homebuyers to finance construction costs, development costs, and non-reoccurring closing costs 
associated with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit and purchase deed restrictions on 
such property. 
SYNOPSIS:  Adds a new part to chapter 201H, HRS, to establish the program.  Under the 
program, the HHFDC is allowed to allocate funds from the Dwelling Unit Revolving Fund to a 
county to (1)  Provide grants to eligible homeowners or homebuyers to finance construction 
costs, development costs, and non‑reoccurring closing costs associated with the construction of 
an accessory dwelling unit; and (2)  Purchase a deed restriction from eligible homeowners or 
homebuyers to be placed on the primary dwelling unit and accessory dwelling unit funded under 
this program. 
The deed restriction placed on a property and owned by a county shall require that the property 
be occupied by at least one owner-occupant or tenant who: 
(1)  Works an average of thirty hours or more per week at a qualified business; 
(2)  Is involuntarily unemployed: 
(A)  From a job in which the owner-occupant or tenant worked an average of 
thirty hours or more per week at a qualified business at the time of initial occupancy; and 
(B)  For a period of less than three hundred sixty-five days; 
(3)  Is retired; provided that the retiree: 
(A)  Was sixty-five years of age or older at the time of retirement; and 
(B)  Worked an average of thirty hours or more per week at a qualified business 
within the county; or 
(4)  Has a disability, as defined in section 515-2, HRS; provided that the owner or tenant 
with a disability worked an average of thirty hours or more per week at a qualified business. 
Makes conforming changes to section 46-15.2, HRS, to allow the counties power to 
participate in the program. 

Re:  HB 740 HD 2 
Page 2 
Amends section 103D-102, HRS, to provide that purchasing deed restrictions under the 
program is exempt from the Procurement Code. 
Makes a conforming change to section 201H-191, HRS, that governs the DURF. 
Amends section 247-3, HRS, to allow a conveyance tax exemption for any conveyance of 
real property with a county owned deed restriction under this program. 
Makes a conforming change to section 525-4, HRS, to allow the deed restriction to be 
permanent and not subject to the rule against perpetuities. 
EFFECTIVE DATE: July 1, 3000.   
STAFF COMMENTS:  The program proposed by this bill proposes to allow counties to buy an 
easement over property that would restrict future use of the property in a way that presumably 
would make it unattractive to or unusable for vacation home or second home use, and thus would 
rein in housing costs for those eligible to live in the property.  
Digested: 3/8/2025 

HB-740-HD-2 
Submitted on: 3/10/2025 9:59:18 AM 
Testimony for HOU on 3/11/2025 1:10:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Glen Kagamida 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
GREAT IDEA TO HELP SOLVE OUR HOUSING CRISIS.  MAHALO! 
 

HB-740-HD-2 
Submitted on: 3/10/2025 10:42:45 AM 
Testimony for HOU on 3/11/2025 1:10:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Ellen Godbey Carson 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Please support this ADU Deed program. It offers another helpful and effective approach to 
making our islands for affordable for our residents. 
Ellen Carson 
Honolulu, Hawaii 
 

HB-740-HD-2 
Submitted on: 3/10/2025 10:55:26 AM 
Testimony for HOU on 3/11/2025 1:10:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Will Caron 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha Chair Chang, Vice Chair Hashimoto, and members of the committee, 
My name is Will Caron and I am a resident of Kahaluʻu, on Oʻahu's windward side, where I was 
born and raised. I am currently a renter, and despite having a secure, relatively well-paying job, 
rent still takes up approximately 30 percent of my annual income after taxes, putting me right on 
the edge of being cost burdened. Many of my neighbors pay a much higher portion of their 
income on housing costs.  
As you know, the housing crisis is the number one driver of displacement of local families and 
houselessness. Something must be done to reduce housing costs, which is why I am so glad to 
see the legislature advancing innovative solutions this session. 
I am writing here in strong support of one of those solutions: HB740 HD2, which would 
establish the Accessory Dwelling Unit Deed Restriction Program to create a protected market of 
housing specifically for Hawaiʻi workforce residents. 
This bill provides grants for ADU construction while securing long-term affordability through 
deed restrictions, creating immediate housing opportunities and preserving them for Hawaiʻi’s 
workforce. Many homeowners looking to build ADUs to ease the housing crisis struggle with 
financial barriers. This grant program will help more moderate-income homeowners contribute 
to housing solutions. 
This program addresses a core driver of Hawaiʻi's housing crisis: the competition between local 
families and outside investors that has made home prices completely disconnected from local 
incomes. 
Many longtime local landowners want to preserve housing for locals, yet face increasing 
financial pressure to sell to outside investors.This program offers a practical solution while also 
helping to increase our housing stock. Offering financial incentives to increase ADU supply will 
provide local families with more versatile housing options; ones that offer smaller, more 
practical homes for local residents, as opposed to the luxury housing options currently available 
in the private housing market. 
Because of the smaller nature of ADUs, these units are typically more affordable and work for a 
variety of housing situations that fit local needs such as:  

• 
Starter homes for young adults; 
• 
Nearby residences for kūpuna to age in place; and 
• 
Independent spaces for family members who can’t yet afford their own home while 
preventing overcrowding. 
By separating our local housing market from the global investment market, we can begin to 
address the massive gap between local incomes and housing costs that is forcing families to 
leave Hawaiʻi. 
I strongly urge the committee to pass HB740 HD2 to create housing stability for Hawaiʻi's 
families. 
Mahalo for the opportunity to testify. 
 

HB-740-HD-2 
Submitted on: 3/10/2025 11:54:19 AM 
Testimony for HOU on 3/11/2025 1:10:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Thomas Brandt 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
TO: Senate Committee on Housing 
RE: Strong Support  HB740 HD2 
Hawai‘i State Capitol, Conference Room 225 & Via Videoconference 
Tuesday, March 11, 2025, 1:10PM 
Aloha Chair Chang, Vice Chair Hashimoto, and members of the committee: 
I am writing in strong support of HB740 HD2, which would establish the Accessory Dwelling 
Unit Deed Restriction Program to create a protected market of housing specifically for Hawaii 
workforce residents. 
This bill provides grants for ADU construction while securing long-term affordability through 
deed restrictions, creating immediate housing opportunities and preserving them for Hawaii’s 
workforce. Many homeowners looking to build ADUs to ease the housing crisis struggle with 
financial barriers. This grant program will help more moderate-income homeowners contribute 
to housing solutions. 
This program addresses a core driver of Hawaii's housing crisis: the competition between local 
families and outside investors that has made home prices completely disconnected from local 
incomes. 
• 
Only 20% of Hawaii residents can afford a median-priced home 
• 
Outside buyers spend on average 46% more than local residents on home purchases 
• 
Median housing costs are 2.7 times the national level 
• 
Housing costs has been cited as the primary reason for locals leaving Hawaii, with a mass 
exodus of thousands of local families leaving 
Many longtime local landowners want to preserve housing for locals, yet face increasing 
financial pressure to sell to outside investors.This program offers a practical solution while also 
helping to increase our housing stock. Offering financial incentives to increase ADU supply will 
provide local families with more versatile housing options; ones that offer smaller, more 
practical homes for local residents, as opposed to the luxury housing options currently available 
in the private housing market. Because of the smaller nature of ADUs, these units are typically 
more affordable and work for a variety of housing situations that fit local needs such as  

• 
starter homes for young adults  
• 
nearby residences for kupuna to age in place 
• 
independent spaces for family members who can’t yet afford their own home while 
preventing overcrowding 
By separating our local housing market from the global investment market, we can begin to 
address the massive gap between local incomes and housing costs that is forcing families to 
leave Hawaii. 
I strongly urge the committee to pass HB740 HD2 to create housing stability for Hawaii's 
families. 
Mahalo for the opportunity to testify. 
 

HB-740-HD-2 
Submitted on: 3/10/2025 12:54:57 PM 
Testimony for HOU on 3/11/2025 1:10:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Lei Fisher 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha mai, 
I STRONGLY SUPPORT this measure, as a lifelong resident of O'ahu, Native Hawaiian, and 
parent who fears for the future of her child to continue to live and work in her ancestral land. 
I strongly disagree that just "building more" will help with the affordable housing crisis - the 
issue is infrastructure, and what is being built is largely Not affordable anyway -- just becoming 
second homes & investment properties for wealthy folks (e.g. the embarassing yet predicable 
failure of Kaka'ako). Even seemingly "family friendly" places like Koa Ridge are priced well 
above what most local families can afford ($1million+ for a CPR single family home). We 
already have tons of housing that is just simple Not Affordable anymore. With this bill idea 
already an established successful program in Colorado, it seems like a no-brainer that we start 
moving away from the "build more" approach to smarter options like this. I personally would 
love to be a part of this program if it comes to fruition. 
Mahalo nui loa to Representative Evslin for introducing & championing this effort. 
Please PASS this HB740.  
Mahalo nui loa, 
Lei Fisher 
 

HB-740-HD-2 
Submitted on: 3/10/2025 9:41:22 PM 
Testimony for HOU on 3/11/2025 1:10:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Mai Hall 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I support keeping local residents housed 
 
 	
