 
 
 
 
 
 
The Judiciary, State of Hawai‘i 
 
Testimony to the Thirty-Third Legislature, 2025 Regular Session 
 
House Committee on Finance 
Representative Kyle T. Yamashita, Chair 
Representative Jenna Takenouchi, Vice Chair 
 
Tuesday, February 25, 2025, 12:00 p.m. 
State Capitol, Conference Room 308 
 
by 
Robert D. S. Kim 
Chief Court Administrator 
Third Circuit Court 
 
 
Bill No. and Title: House Bill No. 727, H.D. 1, Relating to the Women’s Court. 
 
Purpose: Establishes a temporary three-year women's court pilot program within the Second 
and Fifth Circuits. Requires the Third Circuit of the Judiciary and Big Island Drug Court to 
conduct an interim study to establish a blueprint for a women's court pilot program in the Third 
Circuit. Requires reports. Establishes temporary positions. Appropriates funds. Effective 
7/1/3000. Sunsets 6/30/2028. (HD1) 
 
Judiciary's Position:  
 
The Judiciary supports the intent of this measure to establish a Women’s Court pilot 
project in the Third Circuit.  However, the Judiciary proposes amendments and modifications to 
this bill so that the pilot project can be successful in light of the unique structure of the Circuit 
Courts in the Third Circuit and the lack of availability of community-based mental health 
services on the Big Island. 
 
In order to successfully implement a Big Island Women’s Court (BIWC) program, this 
bill would need to be modified to: (1) provide for sufficient funding and staff to operate the 
program in both the Hilo and Kona courthouses; (2) permit the program to operate as a separate 
program under the supervision of Big Island Drug Court (“BIDC”); and (3) establish direct-
provider positions and funding for direct services, which are otherwise unavailable on the Big 
Island.     

House Bill No. 727, H.D. 1, Relating to the Women’s Court 
House Committee on Finance 
 
Tuesday, February 25, 2025 
 
Page 2  
 
 
 
The Circuit Courts in the Third Circuit are structured very differently than those of the 
First Circuit.  Due to the large size of Hawaiʻi Island, the Third Circuit has two main courthouses 
housing Circuit Courts—one in Hilo and one in Kona.  These courthouses are located 100 miles 
apart.  The Circuit Courts in the Third Circuit are also dual-docket courts, meaning Circuit Court 
judges are responsible for hearing all case types, including criminal, civil, agency appeals, 
environmental cases, and more.  Due to this practical restriction on the courts’ docket and the 
geography of the island, it has never been practical in the Third Circuit to have stand-alone 
specialty courts, as has been done successfully in the First Circuit.  Nevertheless, the Third 
Circuit has a history of implementing successful treatment court programs, and the Judiciary now 
looks forward to the opportunity to build upon this history and establish a successful Women’s 
Court program on the Big Island. 
  
Our proposal calls for the establishment of a Women’s Court program to operate in both 
Hilo and Kona, and to be supervised by BIDC.  This structure is identical to the other successful 
treatment court programs currently offered in the Third Circuit.  The drug court program 
operates out of both the Hilo and Kona courthouses to ensure that clients have access to the 
program regardless of where they reside on the island.  Due to the success of the BIDC program, 
Veteran’s Treatment Court and Juvenile Treatment Court programs have also been implemented 
in Hilo and Kona.  These programs are not stand-alone courts, but rather operate as separate 
divisions of BIDC with their own programming, eligibility requirements, and procedures.  The 
proposed BIWC would be the latest addition to these successful specialty court programs. 
 
Accordingly, by situating BIWC under the supervision of BIDC with our other treatment 
court programs, the existing BIDC structure and staff can be leveraged at the outset, allowing us 
to supplement existing services with the additional resources to be provided by this bill.  This 
structure will maximize existing resources and allow the program to focus its efforts on 
developing the programming and services that are at the heart of this pilot project.  Additionally, 
to be an effective use of resources, the Women’s Court program will require a critical mass of 
female probationers who may be eligible for the program.  The highest-risk justice-involved 
women in the Third Circuit are already participating in the BIDC program.  Thus, our proposal 
calls for all twenty-five (25) of the women currently participating in the BIDC program to be 
screened for eligibility for the BIWC program.  This will allow the program to begin providing 
services to the target population immediately, instead of waiting for individual referrals to trickle 
in for a standalone program.    
 
To be successful, the BIWC will require sufficient funding and positions, and a good 
prospect of recruiting qualified staff for those positions.  The Judiciary’s proposal contemplates a 
trauma-informed and gender-responsive program tailored to the unique needs of high-risk 
women, with robust mental health, therapeutic, and rehabilitative components.  The proposal also 
calls for a cultural competency component and staff in peer support roles, with all programing to 

House Bill No. 727, H.D. 1, Relating to the Women’s Court 
House Committee on Finance 
 
Tuesday, February 25, 2025 
 
Page 3  
 
 
be provided in an atmosphere that holds women accountable while providing court-supervised 
treatment, opportunities, and resources.  
 
A truly trauma-informed approach to this program will require extensive mental health 
counseling by trained psychologists, psychiatrists, and/or mental health counselors.  These 
mental health services are severely deficient on Hawaiʻi Island, where a lack of community-
based mental health providers often proves to be an insurmountable barrier to treatment.  
Moreover, our current BIDC staff are not equipped or sufficiently resourced to address these 
complex issues without comprehensive training.  Thus, our proposal for a BIWC has a strong 
focus on the development of mental health services, with the hiring of full-time equivalent 
providers, funding for the creation of new services, and training for program staff. 
 
Similar to other specialty court programs, a one-size-fits-all approach is not always best.  
Circumstances on the neighbor islands may warrant different implementation and different 
resource requirements.  Accordingly, we respectfully request modifications to this measure that 
will allow the Judiciary’s BIWC proposal to be put into action. 
 
If the Legislature is supportive of the Judiciary’s proposal for a BIWC program, we 
welcome continued discussions during this session.  In the alternative, the Legislature could 
direct the Third Circuit and the BIDC to conduct an interim study to establish an updated 
proposal for the program, setting forth additional information regarding the resource 
requirements for the program, to be submitted for the next legislative session.  However, as the 
largest challenges facing the implementation of a Women’s Court program in the Third Circuit is 
the lack of community-based providers, a study may be of little benefit.  
  
The Third Circuit and BIDC stand ready to assist the legislature in whatever policy 
decision is made, as long as we have the requested mental health professionals on contract or 
hired by the Judiciary, along with additional staff members to be hired by BIDC. 
 
In addition, given the Third Circuit’s willingness to pilot this modified Women’s Court 
model, we would respectfully request that the Second and Fifth Circuits be deleted from 
consideration for this pilot project.   
 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony on this important bill. 

 
 
                                                                                   
                                                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
February 24, 2025 
 
 
 
H.B. No. 727, HD1: RELATING TO THE WOMEN’S COURT 
 
Chair Yamashita, Vice-Chair Takenouchi, and Members of the Committee: 
 
 
The Office of the Public Defender supports HB 727, HD1.  This bill establishes a 
three-year women’s court pilot program in the second and fifth circuits and requires 
the third circuit to conduct an interim study to establish a blueprint for a women’s 
court pilot program.  The Office of the Public Defender represents countless women 
in the criminal legal system and knows first-hand the unique needs and issues facing 
these clients.  Often their involvement in the criminal legal system is directly related 
to trauma, abuse, or unhealthy relationships, and they would greatly benefit from 
gender-responsive programming.   
 
The implementation of the women’s court program in the first circuit, known as 
Mohala Wahine, has been thus far successful, with the Office of the Public Defender 
representing most of the participants in the program.   The collaboration with the 
court, the prosecutor’s office, probation department, and service providers has 
allowed the women to receive focused services with the support and resources 
necessary to obtain positive outcomes.  
 
Expansion to the other circuits would allow the program to assist more women in 
need and divert them away from incarceration.  We are mindful of the additional 
resources implementation of such programs will require and are supportive of any 
appropriations as deemed necessary.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this measure. 
 
 
 
JON N. IKENAGA 
                     PUBLIC DEFENDER 
 
DEFENDER COUNCIL 
1130 NORTH NIMITZ HIGHWAY 
SUITE A-254 
HONOLULU, HAWAI‘I  96817 
 
HONOLULU OFFICE 
1130 NORTH NIMITZ HIGHWAY 
SUITE A-254 
HONOLULU, HAWAI‘I  96817 
 
APPELLATE DIVISION 
TEL. NO. (808) 586-2080 
 
 DISTRICT COURT DIVISION 
TEL. NO. (808) 586-2100 
 
FAMILY COURT DIVISION 
TEL. NO. (808) 586-2300 
 
FELONY DIVISION 
TEL. NO. (808) 586-2200 
 
FACSIMILE 
 (808) 586-2222 
HAYLEY Y. C. CHENG 
                ASSISTANT PUBLIC DEFENDER  
 
HILO OFFICE 
275 PONAHAWAI STREET 
SUITE 201 
HILO, HAWAI‘I   96720 
TEL. NO.  (808) 974-4571 
FAX NO.  (808) 974-4574 
 
KONA OFFICE 
75-1000 HENRY STREET  
SUITE #209 
KAILUA-KONA HI   96740 
TEL. NO.  (808) 327-4650 
FAX NO.  (808) 327-4651 
 
KAUA`I OFFICE 
3060 EIWA STREET 
 SUITE 206 
LIHUE, HAWAI‘I  96766 
TEL. NO.  (808) 241-7128 
FAX NO.  (808) 274-3422 
 
MAUI OFFICE 
81 N. MARKET STREET 
WAILUKU, HAWAI‘I  96793 
TEL. NO.  (808) 984-5018 
FAX NO.  (808) 984-5022 
STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
OFFICE OF THE PUBLIC DEFENDER 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

JOSH GREEN, M.D. 
 GOVERNOR OF HAWAII 
KE KIAʻĀINA O KA MOKUʻĀINA ʻO HAWAIʻI 
KENNETH S. FINK, M.D., M.G.A, M.P.H 
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH 
KA LUNA HOʻOKELE 
 
STATE OF HAWAII 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 
KA ʻOIHANA OLAKINO 
P. O. Box 3378 
Honolulu, HI  96801-3378 
doh.testimony@doh.hawaii.gov 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony in SUPPORT of HB727 HD1 
RELATING TO THE WOMEN’S COURT  
REPRESENTATIVE KYLE T. YAMASHITA, CHAIR 
REPRESENTATIVE JENNA TAKENOUCHI, VICE CHAIR 
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
 
Hearing Date and Time: February 25, 2025,12:00 noon  Location: Room 308 & Video 
 
Fiscal Implications: The Department of Health (“Department”) requests funding for this 
1 
measure be considered as a vehicle to expand services, including staff support, provided it does 
2 
not supplant the requests outlined in the Governor's executive budget request. 
3 
Department Position: The Department supports this measure and offers comments.  
4 
Department Testimony:  The Adult Mental Health Division provides the following testimony on 
5 
behalf of the Department. 
6 
The Department supports this measure which proposes to establish a three-year 
7 
Women’s Court pilot program in the circuit court of the second and fifth circuits. The measure 
8 
also requires the third circuit of the Judiciary and Big Island Drug Court to conduct an interim 
9 
study to establish a blueprint for a women's court pilot program in the third circuit. The intent 
10 
of the project is to implement trauma informed and evidence-based practices, employ gender-
11 
responsive programming, collaborate with stakeholders, and provide services to women in the 
12 
court system with the goal of diverting participants from incarceration, supporting their success 
13 
in the community, and reducing recidivism. 
14 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 

HB727 HD1 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
 
Mohala Wahine, which was established in the first circuit by Act 243, SLH 2022, has 
1 
been operational since January 2023. In 2024, through our collaborative partnership with the 
2 
Judiciary, the Department conducted 33 mental health screenings and 24 psychological 
3 
assessments of participants for the program. The services offered by the program are 
4 
comprehensive and provide an opportunity for participants to achieve meaningful and lasting 
5 
recovery. The Department defers to the Judiciary on the feasibility of a pilot project and study 
6 
implementation. 
7 
Offered Amendments:  The Department requests a budget of $801,802, which is based on the 
8 
Department’s staffing requirements for the operation of the existing Women’s Court pilot 
9 
project of the First Circuit. Each circuit would require the following: 
10 
1.0 FTE Clinical Psychologist [$145,000] to conduct psychological assessments 
11 
1.0 FTE Social Worker/Human Services Professional IV [$76,788] to conduct screenings 
12 
1.0 FTE Social Services Assistant V [$45,216] to provide peer support 
13 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this measure. 
14 

RICHARD T. BISSEN, JR. 
Mayor 
 
ANDREW H. MARTIN 
Prosecuting Attorney 
 
SHELLY C. MIYASHIRO 
First Deputy Prosecuting Attorney 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE PROSECUTING ATTORNEY 
COUNTY OF MAUI 
200 SOUTH HIGH STREET 
WAILUKU, MAUI, HAWAI’I  96793 
           PHONE (808) 270-7777  •  FAX (808) 270-7625 
 
TESTIMONY ON 
H.B. 727 HD1 
RELATING TO THE WOMEN’S COURT 
 
February 23, 2025 
 
 
 
 
The Honorable Kyle T. Yamashita 
Chair 
The Honorable Jenna Takenouchi 
Vice Chair 
and Members of the Committee on Finance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and Members of the Committee: 
 
The Department of the Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui respectfully submits the 
following comments in support of H.B. 727 HD1, Relating to the Women’s Court. This bill 
would, inter alia, establish a three-year women’s court pilot program in the second and fifth 
circuits. 
 
 
The Department of the Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui supports this bill because it 
would provide a needed alternative to incarceration for women within the second circuit, 
particularly women with a high risk of recidivism and in need of services in addition to the 
substance abuse treatment already provided by the Maui Drug Court. We also support the 
program’s use of trauma-informed and evidence-based practices. 
 
 
For these reasons, the Department of the Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui supports 
H.B. 727 HD1.  Please feel free to contact our office at (808) 270-7777 if you have any 
questions or inquiries. 
 
 
Thank you very much for the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill. 
 

 
 
HB727 HD1 Women’s Court 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
Rep. Kyle T. Yamashita, Chair 
Rep. Jenna Takenouchi, Vice Chair 
Tuesday, Feb 25, 2025: 12:00: Room 308 Videoconference 
 
 
 
Hawaii Substance Abuse Coalition Supports HB727 HD1: 
 
ALOHA CHAIR, VICE CHAIR, AND DISTINGUISHED COMMITTEE MEMBERS. My 
name is Alan Johnson. I am the current chair of the Hawaii Substance Abuse Coalition 
(HSAC), a statewide organization for substance use disorder and co-occurring mental 
health disorder treatment and prevention agencies and recovery-oriented services. 
 
 
HSAC supports a 3 year pilot program and interim study for a gender responsive 
approach to women who are justice-involved. 
 
Recovery can be complex because recovery involves a multitude of issues such as 
trauma, substance use disorder, mental illness, unhealthy relationships, domestic 
violence, sexual assault, and family law disputes. Courts can ensure a collaboration 
with multiple providers to implement evidenced-based behavioral health practices to 
support their full recovery and not return to incarceration.   
Formal substance abuse with mental illness treatment, 
such as residential and intensive outpatient, is still the 
most effective approach to achieve functionality and 
lasting recovery for justice-involved women.  
 
Substance use disorder coupled with mental health treatment is essential for 
offenders because it addresses the underlying issues that often contribute to criminal 
behavior and helps break the cycle of addiction and recidivism. Gender-responsive 
women’s courts are effective because they address the unique needs and challenges 
women face: 
 
1. Trauma-Informed Approach. Women’s courts often adopt trauma-
informed practices, ensuring that the court process is sensitive to the 
emotional, psychological, and physical impact of trauma on survivors. This 
fosters an environment where women feel safe, heard, and respected. 

  
2. High Rates of Substance Abuse Among Offenders: Many offenders 
struggle with substance use disorders. Studies show that a significant 
proportion of crimes, including theft, assault, and drug-related offenses, are 
committed under the influence of drugs or alcohol. 
 
3. Addresses Root Causes of Criminal Behavior: Substance abuse often 
coexists with mental health issues, trauma, or socioeconomic challenges. 
Treatment programs can provide a comprehensive approach to addressing 
these interconnected factors. Treating substance abuse can lower the 
likelihood of reoffending. Offenders who receive effective treatment are more 
likely to develop coping skills and lead crime-free lives after release. 
 
4. Specialized Training for Judges and Staff: Judges, attorneys, and court 
staff in women’s courts typically receive specialized training in gender 
dynamics, domestic violence, and trauma. This equips them to make 
informed, fair decisions and avoid perpetuating biases or re-traumatizing 
survivors. 
 
5. Integrated Social Services: Women’s courts often partner with social 
services, offering survivors access to counseling, housing assistance, legal aid, 
childcare, and job training. This holistic approach addresses the underlying 
issues that women face, helping them rebuild their lives. 
 
6. Empowering Women: By creating a supportive and understanding 
environment, women’s courts help survivors regain confidence, independence, 
and control over their lives, encouraging long-term recovery and stability 
while simultaneously holding perpetrators accountable while ensuring victim 
safety. 
 
This focused approach ensures that justice-involved women are given an opportunity 
to rebuild their lives, contributing positively to society rather than being trapped in 
cycles of crime and incarceration. 
 
We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony and are available for questions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMMUNITY ALLIANCE ON PRISONS 
P.O. Box 37158, Honolulu, HI 96837-0158 
Phone/E-Mail:  (808) 927-1214 / kat.caphi@gmail.com 
 
Today’s Inmate; Tomorrow’s Neighbor 
 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
Rep. Kyle Yamashita, Chair 
Rep. Jenna Takenouchi, Vice Chair 
Tuesday, February 25, 2025 
Room 308 & VIDEOCONFERENCE 
12:00 NOON 
 
STRONG SUPPORT FOR HB 727 HD1 – WOMEN’S COURT                                                       
 
Aloha Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi and Members of the Committee! 
 
My name is Kat Brady and I am the Coordinator of Community Alliance on 
Prisons, a community initiative promoting smart justice policies in Hawai`i for 
more than two decades. This testimony is respectfully offered on behalf of the 
3,700 Hawai`i individuals living behind bars1 and under the “care and custody” 
of the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation as of February 17. 2025.  We 
are always mindful that 936 – 49.6% of Hawai`i’s male prison population are 
serving their sentences abroad -- thousands of miles away from their loved ones, 
their homes and, for the disproportionate number of incarcerated Kanaka Maoli, 
far, far from their ancestral lands. 
 
Community Alliance on Prisons appreciates the opportunity to strongly 
support HB 727 HD1 establishes a temporary three-year women's court pilot 
program within the Second and Fifth Circuits. Requires the Third Circuit of the 
Judiciary and Big Island Drug Court to conduct an interim study to establish a 
blueprint for a women's court pilot program in the Third Circuit. Requires reports. 
Establishes temporary positions and funding. 
 
 
1 DCR Weekly Population Report, February 17, 2025 
https://dcr.hawaii.gov/wp-content/uploads/2025/01/Pop-Reports-Weekly-2025-02-17.pdf 
 

We are so happy that Judge Kim from Hawai`i Island participated in the 
hearings on this proposal and educated the committees and policymakers on the 
needs of our neighbor islands. We know that Hawai`i does not have all the services 
needed to address the issues facing some of our most vulnerable people, especially 
those living on neighbor islands, who have fewer resources than O`ahu. 
 
The prior committee discussions has empowered the Third Circuit to 
conduct an interim study to develop a blueprint for the establishment of a 
Women’s Court program there. This is a great start for a program praised by Chief 
Justice Recktenwald in his 2025 State of the Judiciary speech. 
 
Community Alliance on Prisons hopes that the committee sees the value in 
improving the quality of justice in Hawai`i nei. 
 
Mahalo nui! 
 
 

HB-727-HD-1 
Submitted on: 2/21/2025 10:26:53 PM 
Testimony for FIN on 2/25/2025 12:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Jackson Roy Harrington 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Testimony in Support of HB727 HD1 
Dear Chair and Members of the Committee, 
I am writing in strong support of HB727. This bill is important because it is a step toward giving 
supportive services to women in the justice system. This is importnat because many of these 
women face unique challenges related to trauma, mental health, and substance abuse. By 
supporting this bill I think that we can help to address the specfic and special needs of women 
and help them reintegrate into society. I SUPPORT THIS BILL. 
Thank you, 
Jackson Roy 
University of Hawaiʻi at Manoa (Senior) 
 

HB-727-HD-1 
Submitted on: 2/21/2025 10:29:26 PM 
Testimony for FIN on 2/25/2025 12:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Katrina Fenner 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha Chair Tarnas, Vice Chair Poepoe and Committee Members 
I am a current undergrad student at UH Manoa studying criminology and I strongly support bill 
HB727 relating to Women's Court that establishes a temporary three-year woman's court pilot 
program within the second, third and fifth circuits. 
It is important that we divert women from entering the carceral system which perpetuates 
violence. Providing programs geared towards the health and well being of our wahine ensures 
they re-integrate into their communities: reducing recidivism. It is essential these women have 
access to the necessary resources to ensure they can re-integrate into society, considering that 
should be the purpose of our prison system! It is important we provide women with the help they 
need to become productive and caring members of society. 
Mahalo for the opportunity to submit testimony 
  
 

HB-727-HD-1 
Submitted on: 2/23/2025 9:11:47 AM 
Testimony for FIN on 2/25/2025 12:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Carolyn Eaton 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha, Chair Yamashita, Vice Chair Takenouchi, and Members of the Committee, 
My name is Carolyn Eaton and I strongly support the extension of the Women's Court program 
to the women of our neighbor islands.  The success of the program on Oahu is extremely 
exciting. 
Mahalo for your service.   
 

HB-727-HD-1 
Submitted on: 2/23/2025 9:22:55 PM 
Testimony for FIN on 2/25/2025 12:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Colleen Rost-Banik 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Dear Committee on Judiciary and Hawaiian Affairs, 
My name is Colleen Rost-Banik. I am a Sociology instructor at University of Hawaii, Manoa, 
and I facilitate a creative writing class at the Women's Community Correctional Center. I 
strongly support HB727, which establishes a pilot program of the Women's Court, with the 
expansion to neighbor islands. Having worked with numerous women at WCCC, I have heard 
countless stories about the challenging situations that they have had to navigate as 
victims/survivors of abuse while also trying to care for their children. Sometimes all of this is on 
top of substance addiction, often used as a coping strategy for the trauma they've experienced. 
Suffice it to say that many of the women who are incarcerated have lives that are extremely 
complicated. A Women's Court is designed to take these complexities into consideration. Please 
support HB727. It will be a step toward ensuring the betterment of Hawaii's women and their 
families. 
Mahalo for your consideration. 
Colleen Rost-Banik, Ph.D. 
 

HB-727-HD-1 
Submitted on: 2/24/2025 9:09:52 AM 
Testimony for FIN on 2/25/2025 12:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Michelle Manalo 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
I am in support of HB727. 
Services for women in the judicial system are essential. Support, education, and awareness lead 
to a positive impact and success in the community, and prevents recidivism. 
 

HB-727-HD-1 
Submitted on: 2/24/2025 11:04:34 AM 
Testimony for FIN on 2/25/2025 12:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Heather McVay 
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Support. 
 

 
Aloha my name is Genesis Kepo’o. I am writing in support of HB 727, relating to the 
importance of a Women’s Court, here on the island of Hawai’i. 
 
I am originally from the island of Kaua’I and moved to Hawaii island in 2002. I am the 
oldest of 3 and as such the burden of taking care of my younger siblings fell to me at a 
young age. Having to “grow up” at a young age, I got caught up with experimentation during 
middle & high school.  
 
For most of my adult life I used off and on, until I couldn’t. I found myself being 
arrested and having to navigate my way through the judicial system. I attempted to comply 
with regular probationary rules but found I just couldn’t stay clean. During a revocation that 
had me spend 30 days in jail, I heard about Drug Court. Of course, it was “don’t do it,” 
“you’ll never be able to get out of it,” and so on.  
 
I was ready to be done and move on with my life so when my probation officer 
brought up Drug Court, I jumped at the chance. I needed someone to hold me accountable 
and keep me on the right track. I graduated in May 2023 and have been able to remain 
clean. Drug Court helps to get you the tools you need to lead an honest & productive life. 
Since then, I have worked in a treatment center and currently work in the mental health 
field.  
 
HB 727 is important to bring awareness to individual needs and how to lower 
recidivism. Women are hard wired to take on others’ problems, stress, feelings, you name 
it, we want to fix it for you. With that mentality, anyone would crack. Women require more 
support whether we know it or not. By creating a Women’s court, it would reduce the 
number of women in jail, keeping families together. Having Women’s Mental & Behavioral 
Health available to help with SUD and mental health issues will help destigmatize getting 
help. There’s nothing wrong with needing help, having it available would make it easier to 
get. It would create a safe place to find help. 
 
There is nothing better than being able to talk with someone you know has come 
from similar situations as you and made it through the dark tunnel, back into the sun. Peer 
support and getting back to your roots are by far some of the best therapy there can be. 
Someone who can help you through those dark times by showing you the way. Recentering 
and getting back into cultural practices with a knowledgeable teacher can do more for 
mind, body, & spirit. For both women and men! 
 
Please support HB 727, relating to Women’s Court. 
 
Mahalo, 
Genesis L E Kepo’o 

HB-727-HD-1 
Submitted on: 2/24/2025 11:31:04 AM 
Testimony for FIN on 2/25/2025 12:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Shelbie  
Individual 
Support 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Aloha and good afternoon. 
   My name is Shelbie Keka. I am writing a testimony in support of HB727. Relating to a 
women’s court, on the big island. 
Growing up I was raised with 3 older brothers and with both parents that battled with the disease 
of addiction. My father was addicted to meth and my mother addicted to meth/herion. My 
brothers and I never had a stable home but by the grace of god my aunty who was a single 
mother opened her home to us. We resided with her for about 5 years until my dad had called 
and wanted us back because he was clean.  
   My mother left to Oahu during that time to regain control of her life again and entered 
treatment there. Unfortunately the addiction is so strong that it ripped my dad away from us for 
the second time but it also took my two brothers as well. Having no adult supervision or family 
to take us in again my brother and I  were forced to move to Oahu to live with my mom, who at 
the time had just graduated treatment and had her own place. We were there for about a year and 
a half before my brother decided to leave and go back to the big island.  
   I was unhappy and began to go downhill with my life, I ditched school causing me to repeat the 
9th and 10th grade then I began to drink pop pills and smoke weed. My relationship with my 
mom at the time became rocky and she kicked me out. I was able to return to the big island and 
stay with my active using dad. When I returned home I started cruising the streets on Ali drive. I 
met the wrong crowd and decided to take my first hit with them. I was only 17 years old.I battled 
the disease of addiction for the next 4-5 years. A few months into smoking meth I began to steal 
from innocent people or even from my family. I sold drugs, stole people cars and mopeds. Lied 
and cheated. Even after being incarcerated many times, I came back out to the streets and did it 
all again!  
   No one really understands until you’ve actually been there. Being homeless for so long and an 
active user in the streets, I’ve seen so many things. It’s not easy for women to be  out there, I’ve 
seen many women get abused verbally physically and mentally. I’ve seen them get taken 
advantage of as well as manipulated into doing things that they would have not done before. 
When I had my last arrest I was in regular probation and knew I wouldn’t get out for a while.  
  Being incarcerated I had time to gain clarity on my life, I knew that I wanted better and to do 
better. I called my lawyer to submit an application to big island drug court. A few weeks go by 
and I got approved , I was released my very next court hearing. I met with my new po as well as 
my old one and the deal was I had to go to Hilo BISAC the next day.  
   Because I was blessed with that opportunity I graduated treatment. I came back to Kona got a 
job, got my license and my very first legal car. Then I moved out to our very first house with my 
significant other who is also a graduate of big island drug court. I obtained my GED and lastly, I 

successfully completed the drug court program. All these things were possible because of the 
staff that runs these programs and the rules that are placed to keep us sober. 
    That’s why this proposal is very important to me because not only does it come from people 
who care about the suffering addicts but because it works! After graduation I still continued to 
strive now I am a home owner and a co owner to a cleaning business. So it shows that it’s also a 
long term success for the recovering addict. This program should be in high demand because 
women don’t have much, BISAC treatment only had one house for 8 girls and two houses for the 
men  for double occupancy! Women also value their mental health and being on drugs damages 
that for us. We loose who we are and who we are meant to become, it breaks us to the point 
where we loose value for life. That’s why this program should pass because we need to help our 
native people to become positive members of society, to allow the kids to have their parents 
present in their lives and to break these generational curses.  
   I know this program will have the power to do all of that and save our native people! These 
women and men need our help, YOUR help. If not this vicious cycle will continue to degrade 
our culture and our people. So I ask to please support HB727 relating to women’s court just as I 
do. Mahalo for your time.  
  
 

           In Support of HB 727 
 
 
 
 
 
Aloha Commitee, 
 
I am Jessicamae Caravalho, LSW and I am honored to submit this testimony in strong support of 
the establishment of a Women’s Court in the Second and Fifth Circuits, which will provide a 
specialized judicial process to address issues unique to women. 
 
As a Big Island Drug Court graduate, I am familiar with the benefits of specialized courts. Drug 
courts provide tailored interventions, and I have experienced how these courts create pathways to 
rehabilitation and recovery. Today, I am beyond grateful to hold a Master in Social Work degree 
– soon to sit for clinical examination, while being of service to my community. Similarly, a 
Women’s Court would offer targeted solutions for gender-specific issues, ensuring that women 
receive fair and equitable treatment within the justice system. 
 
HB 727 proposes to offer a safe space for women, ensuring that they are heard without bias or 
fear of intimidation. The legal process can be daunting, and many women hesitate to seek 
assistance due to societal pressures, stigma, or lack of proper legal support. Research indicates 
that women’s involvement in criminal behavior is often influenced by histories of abuse, trauma, 
poverty, mental illness, substance use disorders, and unhealthy relationships. Traditional legal 
structures often fail to adequately address complex trauma. A dedicated Women’s Court would 
ensure that such cases receive the specialized attention they require, with trained staff who 
understand the nuances of gender-based issues.  
HB 727 seeks to implement trauma-informed practices, offering legal, psychological, and social 
services in a coordinated manner. These services include trauma and mental health treatment; 
family support, including parenting, education, and relationship improvement; life-skills training; 
education and vocational training; domestic violence prevention; medical services and health 
education; substance abuse detection, prevention, and treatment, mentoring and housing support. 
Women’s Court is specifically designed to cater to complex needs by bridging the gap in the 
justice system and ensuring that women receive equitable treatment. 
I, respectfully, ask that you stand in support of this measure. 
Mahalo, 
Jessicamae Caravalho, LSW 
Jessicamae Caravalho, LSW 
 

HB-727-HD-1 
Submitted on: 2/24/2025 1:47:25 PM 
Testimony for FIN on 2/25/2025 12:00:00 PM 
Submitted By 
Organization 
Testifier Position 
Testify 
Frank Schultz 
Individual 
Oppose 
Written Testimony 
Only 
 
 
Comments:  
Little to no info on what is the purpose of this women's court. 
 
 LATE *Testimony submitted late may not be considered by the Committee for decision making purposes. 
